General Examination Regulations  
for the 
Master’s Degree 
[Rahmenprüfungsordnung-Master / 
RPO-M] 
at the University of Siegen 
Issued 28 February 2019 
The translations provide a service to international students, researchers and staff. The legally 
binding version of the notifications are available in German only. 

1 
In accordance with § 2 para. 4 and § 64 para. 1 of th e Highe r Education Act for the State of North Rhine-
Westphalia (Hochschulgesetz, HG) dated 16 September 2014 (Gesetz- und Verordnungsblatt, GV. NRW. 
p. 547), last amend
ed by legislation dated 17 October 2017 (GV. NRW. p. 806), the Univer sity of Siegen
has i
ssued the following general examination regulations:
Note: This unofficial version is only provided for informational purposes. Only the German-language 
regul
ations as formally published in an Amtliche Mitteilung from the University of Siegen are legally binding.

2  
General Regulations 
§ 1 Scope 
§ 2 General Objectives and Guidelines for the Master’s Degree 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment 
§ 5 Standard Term of Study and Credit Point Requirements 
§ 6 Modularization of the Academic Program 
§ 7 Structure of Studies toward the Ma ster’s Degree (Non-Teacher Education) 
§ 8 Examination Board 
§ 9 Examiners 
§ 10 Coursework 
§ 11 Examinations 
§ 12 Repetition of Coursework and Examinations 
§ 13 Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis 
§ 14 Master's Thesis 
§ 15 Acceptance and Grading of the Master’s Thesis 
§ 16 Repetition of the Master’s Thesis 
§ 17 Acceptance of Transfer Credits 
§ 18 Unexcused Absence, Withdrawal, Cheating 
§ 19 Familial Obligations, Protective Regulations, Academic Leave 
§ 20 Compensation for Disadvantages for St udents with Disabilities or Chronic Illnesses 
§ 21 Grades, Calculation of Grades 
§ 22 Completion of the Course of Studies 
§ 23 Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma 
§ 24 Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records 
§ 25 Access to Examination Records 
§ 26 Invalidity of Examination Results and Revocation of the Master's Degree  
Special Regulations for Teacher Education [Lehramt] 
§ 27 Master’s Degree (Teacher Education) 
§ 28 Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment (Teacher Education) 
§ 29 Structure of the Academic  Program (Teacher Education) 
§ 30 Examination Board (Teacher Education) 
§ 31 Examinations (Teacher Education) 
§ 32 Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis (Teacher Education) 
§ 33 Grades, Calculation of Grades (Teacher Education) 
§ 34 Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma (Teacher Education) 
§ 35 Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records (Teacher Education) 
Entry into Effect 
§ 36 Entry into Effect and Publication 

3  
Annex 1: Sample Departmental Examination Regulations (FPO-M) 
Annex 2: Sample Master’s Degree Programs (Non-Teacher Education) 
Annex 3: Majors Compatible with Teacher Education 

4  
General Regulations 
 
 
§ 1 
Scope 
(1) These General Examination Regulations [Rahmenprüfungsordnung-Master, hereinafter RPO-M] apply 
in respect of the master's degree at the University of Siegen. They govern the fundamental structure of 
studies leading to a master's degree and contain fo rmal requirements for the composition of the 
Departmental Examination Regulations [ Fachprüfungsordnung-Master, hereinafter FPO-M] and the 
Module Descriptions [ Modulbeschreibungen, MBS]. Based on these RPO-M, discipline-specific 
regulations are to be established in the FPO- M of each individual degree program and the module 
descriptions are to be created. In particular, each respective FPO-M establishes concrete regulations 
on the: 
1. goals for the university studies, 
2. academic title to be awarded, 
3. scope of studies (standard term of study, number of credit points), 
4. number of modules (module titles, module numbers), 
5. participation requirements and nominal workload for the modules, 
6. sequence of courses, 
7. content and qualification goals for the modules, 
8. instructional formats for the modules, 
9. coursework and examinations within the modules, 
10. duration and form of coursework and examinations, and the 
11. composition of the examination board. 
Insofar as a degree program includes a module from another academic discipline, cross-
reference must be provided to the corresponding module description in the FPO for that other 
discipline. If the respective rules of the two relevant FPOs are in conflict, then the relevant 
departments will need to agree on the examination modalities and record the terms of their 
agreement in the relevant module description. 
(2) For degree programs that require an internship, a se t of internship regulations should be created with 
supplemental regulations regarding internships. 
(3) For degree programs offered in cooperation with another German or foreign higher education institution, 
the FPO-M can include regulations in derogation of those stipulated in these RPO-M. 
(4) § 1 to § 26 contain general regulations. § 27 to § 35 contain special regulations (supplemental, limiting, 
or broadening) for the master’s degree in teacher education [ Lehramt]. § 36 specifies when these 
regulations enter into effect. 
 
 
§ 2 
General Objectives and Guidelines for the Master’s Degree 
(1) Consecutive master’s degree programs are designed to be consolidate or broaden existing knowledge, 
or to convey interdisciplinary or specialist expertise from a different subject area. Differentiation is made 
between “application-oriented” and “research-orient ed” profile types. Conversion master’s degree 
programs require that a candidate possesses qualified professional experience, typically of not less than 
one year. The degree program concept for conversion master's degree programs accounts for 
vocational experience and builds on this to achi eve the intended qualificati on goals. Upon successful 
completion, the master’s degree constitutes a separate university-level professional qualification. 
(2) The qualification goals are an academic or artistic level of skill befitting the desired degree and the ability 
to engage in an occupation or in personal development requiring such a qualification. 

5  
(3) Degree program-specific goals are contained in the FPO-M. 
 
§ 3 
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of the course of study, the university awards the academic degree of “Master of 
Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of Laws” (LL.M.). The FPO-M regulates which specific 
title denoted in Sentence 1 is conveyed upon successful co mpletion of the course of studies. If the studies 
comprise multiple degree components (cf. § 7 para. 1) , then the degree is conveyed in the major subject 
[Kernfach]. Conversion degree programs can also convey master’s degrees in derogation of the 
aforementioned titles. 
 
 
§ 4 
Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment 
(1) Admission to the master’s degree program is open to applicants in possession of a first cycle university 
qualification. 
(2) The FPO-M can include the following additional admission requirements within the meaning of § 49 HG:  
1. Paragraph 6 sentence 1 (Proof of specialist prerequisites), 
2. Paragraph 6 sentence 3 (Proof of a specific grade point average for the bachelor's degree), 
3. Paragraph 7 (Proof of special preparatory training related to the degree program, artistic or other 
suitability or practical activity), and 
4. Paragraph 8 (Proof of specific language skills in (partially) foreign-language degree programs). 
(3) University degrees earned in degree programs at  foreign state-run or state-accredited higher 
educational institutions will be recognized upon applic ation, insofar as the competencies acquired as 
part of the degree do not differ significantly from  a domestic degree that qualifies the applicant for 
admission to the master’s degree program. 
(4) Admission to a master’s degree program (non-teacher education) can be tied to preconditions. Any such 
conditions must be satisfied within the first two se mesters of the master’s degree program. Proof of 
fulfillment must be provided no later than at the time of registration for the master’s thesis. The FPO-M 
can stipulate that the proof of fu lfillment of the conditions be rendered at an earlier point in time. The 
nature and scope of these conditions will be determi ned on a case-by-case basis by the respective 
examination board based on the cont ent of the degree program that was previously completed. 
Preconditions may only be based on bachelor modules. Conditions can only be issued for up to 30 credit 
points. The regulations stipulated in § 8–12 and 17–21 also apply to preconditions. Examinations related 
to preconditions are not included in the calculation of the grade point average for the degree. 
(5) Supplemental to Paragraph 1 and 2, a relevant university degree conveying a professional qualification 
and relevant professional experience must be prov en for admission to a conversion master’s degree 
program. 
(6) The FPO-M can stipulate that enrollment be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an examination 
in a degree program of notably similar content to the desired degree program and where the examination 
regulations define the examination in question as essential for the des ired degree program (§ 50 
para. 1(2) HG). 
 
 
§ 5 
Standard Term of Study and Credit Point Requirements 
(1) Successful completion of studies for a master's degree requires 60, 90, or 120 credit points (CP), as 
determined by the stipulations in these regulations as well as the regulations of the relevant FPO-M. 
(2) For full time students, the standard term of study for degree programs concluding with a master’s 
degree is at least two and at most four semesters, including the master’s thesis. 

6  
The standard term of study is defined in the rele vant FPO-M. The following standard terms of study 
generally apply, depending on how many credit points need to be earned and the model of studies (full-
time or part-time): 
 
 
 
CP 
Standard term of study (in semesters) 
Full-time student Part-time student 
60 2 4 
90 3 6 
120 4 8 
 
The FPO-M define whether a given master’s degree program is available to part-time students or 
exclusively on a full-time basis. 
 
 
§ 6 
Modularization of the Academic Program 
(1) The academic program is structured modularly and works with a credit point system. Modules are self-
contained units of study that are limited in topic and time frame, and which can encompass a range of 
teaching and learning forms (such as lectures, exerci ses, internships, eLearning, individual or group 
projects, etc.). 
(2) Credit points are awarded for successful completion of a module. Credit points are calculated based on 
the projected required workload for the students. On  average, students are expected to perform 1,800 
hours of work per academic year. Each credit point is based on representing 30 hours of work, either in 
the classroom or self-guided. In  general, 60 credit points are awarde d per academic year. The credit 
points for any given module should be divisible by three. Polyvalent modules must be awarded the same 
number of credit points across the different fields of study, and usually total nine credit points. 
‘Polyvalent’ refers to modules offered across different degree programs that ar e identical in terms of 
module length, frequency offered, workload, credit points, qualification goals, content, work assignments 
(incl. form, length, scope), lectures, forms of instruction and learning, prerequisites for participation, and 
conditions for awarding of credit points. The prerequisites for successful completion of the module and 
the awarding of the credit points are defined in the FPO-M. 
(3) Admission to a course or module can be made depende nt on specific prerequi sites, and successful 
completion of another course or module(s) in particular. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 7 
Structure of Studies toward the Master’s Degree (Non-Teacher Education) 
(1) The master’s degree program (excluding teacher e ducation) comprises a degree program (single 
subject degree program/interdisciplinary degree program) or a combination degree program built around 
multiple degree components comprising a major subject [ Kernfach] and a minor subject 
[Ergänzungsfach] (Annex 2). 
(2) The FPO-M establish which models are offered for a given degree program/degree component. 
(3) Each master’s degree program should offer electives to taling at least 18 credit points. In total, the 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees should offer electives totaling 45 credit points. The FPO-M establish 
the technical and/or interdisciplinary modules from  which students of a given degree program may 
choose. Electives must be identified explicitly in the FPO-M. 
 
 

7  
§ 8 
Examination Board 
(1) Within the faculties, general and/or technica l examination boards are formed to handle the 
responsibilities defined in these RPO-M and in the FPO-M. The precise composition of those boards is 
determined within the individual FPO-M. For degree programs involving multiple faculties, the faculties 
can form interfaculty examination boards. An exam ination board can be suppor ted in the execution of 
its duties by an office of examinations. Specific details are regulated in FPO-M. 
(2) The examination boards are comprised of: 
a) members of the teaching faculty, 
b) members of the academic staff, and 
c) members of the student body, 
and at least half of the votes must be held by mem bers of the faculty. The FPO-M can allow for the 
selection of deputies in the event that appointed members are unable to attend. 
(3) An examination board may also draw upon additional members with specialized technical knowledge 
as needed. 
(4) The number and terms of office for the members of the examination board are determined in the 
respective FPO-M. The faculty council for the faculty to which the degree program belongs elects 
members of the examination board(s) specified in the FPO-M from a pool of candidates proposed by its 
respective member groups and for a term of office as specified in the FPO-M. For degree programs 
involving multiple faculties, the relevant facult y councils elect members of the examination board in 
accordance with the regulations laid out in the FPO-M. 
(5) If no new member has been elected at the end of the term of office of an incumbent member, then that 
incumbent member will continue in office. If a member resigns their duties early, then a replacement 
member shall be elected through a special election. Any member appointed through such a special 
election shall serve out remainder of the departed member’s term of office. Re-election is permissible. 
(6) The examination boards elect a chairperson and deputy chairperson from among their teaching faculty 
members. 
(7) The examination boards organize examinations in their sphere of responsibility and ensure compliance 
with the provisions of these RPO-M and the relevant FPO-M. In particular, they are responsible for ruling 
on appeals against decisions made in relation to t he exam procedures. Beyond this, the examination 
boards make decisions about the acceptance of previously acquired academic degrees and transfer of 
credit for coursework and examinations. The examin ation boards can entrust the execution of these 
duties to the chairperson, insofar as these duties are not already explicitly delegated to the chair by 
these regulations or the FPO-M; this option is not available for decisions on appeals. 
(8) The FPO-M can stipulate a reporting mandate by the examination board to the respective faculties. 
(9) Insofar as a general examination board and technica l examination board are to be formed for degree 
components, the technical examination board is responsible for the following discipline-specific tasks: 
1. Decisions on questions regarding admission and placement, 
2. Decisions on equivalency and the acceptance of academic degrees and on the transfer of 
previously completed semesters as well as coursework and examinations, 
3. Appointment of examiners pursuant to § 9 para. 2, 
4. Proposal of an assessor for the master’s thesis , insofar as the examination candidate has not 
already proposed one, in accordance with § 14 para. 7, 
5. Approval of additional languages in accordance with § 14 para. 6, and 
6. Handling of appeals to decisions made by the committee. 
The technical examination boards can delegate these duties to the chairperson, insofar as these duties 
are not already explicitly delegated to the chair by these regulations or the FPO-M; this option is not 
available for decisions on appeals. 
(10) Meetings of the examination boards are convened by the respective chairperson. Meetings of 

8  
examination boards are not open to the public. T he members of the examination boards and their 
deputies are legally obligated to confidentiality. Members who are not public sector employees [ im 
öffentlichen Dienst] must be sworn to confidentiality by the chairperson of the examination board. 
(11) The examination board has a quorum if the number of members present pursuant to Paragraph 2 (a) is 
at least equal to the number of members present from the categories indicated in Paragraph 2 (b) and 
(c) and at least half of its voting members are present. 
 
(12) The examination board decides by simple majority. In  the event of a tie, the chairperson's vote is 
decisive. 
(13) In matters related to the assessment and acceptance of academic degrees, the assessment, 
endorsement, and transfer of coursework and examination credits, and the establishment of examination 
tasks, student members of the examination board serve solely in a consulting role. 
(14) Examination boards are considered government agencies for their fields in the sense of the 
Administrative Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz]. 
 
 
§ 9 
Examiners 
(1) University examinations, in compliance with § 65 para. 1 HG, may only be held by instructors at the 
institution of higher education and,  where appropriate and necessary to  ensure the testing objectives, 
by persons with experience in the relevant field and as educators. Examinations may only be graded by 
persons who, at minimum, already hold the same or an equivalent qualification to the qualification being 
conveyed by the examination itself. Examiners are not subject to external direction in their examination 
activities. 
(2) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain any derogating regulations, the role of examiner must be 
performed by the instructors for the respective cour se or module, presuming that they satisfy the 
conditions of eligibility listed in  Paragraph 1. Alternatively, th e chairperson of the responsible 
examination board can also appoint other eligible persons (as previously defined in Paragraph 1) to 
serve as examiner. Where required for situations explicitly denoted in these examination regulations or 
the FPO-M, the chairperson of the responsibl e examination board will name a second and third 
examiner. 
(3) The FPO-M can restrict eligibility for potential examiners. 
 
 
§ 10 
Coursework 
(1) Modules can stipulate that students must complete coursework as part of courses. Coursework refers 
to all forms of learning, presentation of instruct ional materials, and other checks of knowledge and 
competency that are necessary to complete the module, but which do not factor into the official grade. 
In particular, coursework is intended to help students self-assess the success of their studies, practice 
methods of academic learning, ex plore various text and presentati on formats, independently broaden 
knowledge and competencies acquired through seminar s, and create material for additional seminar 
discussions and/or more in-depth exploration of personal interests within the module, where appropriate. 
Coursework can take on a wide range of forms, including: 
1. written test, 
2. short presentations, 
3. short written texts, 
4. oral test,  
5. samples of work or portfolios, or 
6. a combination of methods of rendering as enumerated in these regulations and the FPO-M. 
The FPO-M can also include other options for rendering coursework. Written tests in electronic form are 

9  
governed by § 11 para. 8 and 9 respectively. 
(2) The form and scope of coursework to be rendered must be denoted in the module description. Insofar 
as multiple possible methods for rendering coursework are defined, t he instructor of the course must 
announce the format and scope of coursework in an appropriate form no later than four weeks after the 
start of the course. 
(3) Insofar as the successful completion of coursework is necessary for admission to an examination, this 
must be regulated in the FPO-M. 
(4) Failed coursework can be repeated without limi t. Coursework can be graded or ungraded. Where 
graded, those grades do not count toward the respective module grade. 
(5) Students must register for coursework credit, typically using the campus management system. 
Exceptions to this rule are determined and announced by the competent examination board. 
Registration to receive credit for coursework must be made before a specified deadline. Students must 
register for coursework for each course individually. Students are responsible for informing themselves 
about all dates and deadlines for coursework (such as from the office of examinations or the campus 
management system). 
(6) Coursework grades should be released no later than six weeks after the coursework is completed or the 
official due date, insofar as no other deadline is stipulated by the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 11  
Examinations 
(1) Modules typically conclude with an examination oriented toward the qualification objectives defined for 
the module. Examinations are graded. These grades count toward the final grade. Paragraph 3 remains 
unaffected. Examination grades are classified as admi nistrative decisions within the meaning of the 
Administrative Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz]. 
(2) Examinations can be comprised of multiple ex amination elements, which together represent a 
cumulative examination credit. The individual ex amination elements, including their respective 
weighting, must be listed in the module description. 
(3) In derogation of Paragraph 1, the FPO-M can dictate that examinations related to modules intended for 
the first two semesters of a degree program’s curriculum (orientation modules) are not graded, or that 
any grades associated with such modules do not count toward the final grade. Orientation modules must 
be denoted as such in the FPO-M. 
(4) Students need to register for examinations, typica lly via the campus management system. Exceptions 
to this rule are established and announced by the competent examination board. Students need to 
register to take an examination before the specif ied deadline. Separate registration must be made for 
each individual examination. Students are responsible for informing themselves about all appointments 
and deadlines for examinations (such as from the of fice of examinations or the campus management 
system). Examination candidates can withdraw from the examination up to one week before the start of 
the examination using the campus management syst em or by contacting the competent examination 
board. 
For examination dates that have not been organized and announced via the campus management 
system or the examination board, but rather directly by the examiner, it  is possible to withdraw at any 
time prior to the start of the examination or the negotiated delivery date, provided that the FPO-M does 
not contain regulations specifying otherwise. 
(5) Examinations are only open to persons who are: 
1. officially enrolled at the University of Siegen in one or more degree programs pursuant to § 48 HG 
or who have been admitted as cross-registered students within the meaning of § 52 HG, and 
2. who have, where applicable, completed the prereq uisites for admission to the examination as 
stipulated in the FPO-M. 
Admission to examinations is generally handled by the examination registration function of the campus 
management system. Exceptions are announced by the competent examination board. The competent 
examination board decides on any disputed cases involving admission to examinations. Any candidate 
who does not fulfill the prerequisites set out in Sentence 1 shall not be admitted. 

10  
(6) The following forms of examination, among others, are permissible: 
1. written examination (including in electronic exam inations (cf. Paragraph 8) and multiple-choice 
written examination (cf. Paragraph 9) lasting from 45 minutes to a maximum of four hours, 
2. oral examinations lasting 15 to 60 minutes per candidate, 
3. term paper, or 
4. a combination of these examination formats as enumerated in these regulations and the FPO-M. 
The FPO-M can also include other examination format s. In this case, the scope of the examination 
should be regulated in the FPO-M. 
(7) The format and scope of the examination to be taken are defined in the module description. Insofar as 
several possible methods for completing examinations  are denoted, the instruct or of the course must 
announce the format and scope of the examination in an appropriate form no later than four weeks after 
the start of the course. 
(8) Examinations can be produced, conducted, and scored in  part or whole in electronic form (e-Klausur). 
In particular, electronic examinatio ns can in include editing of free te xt assignments, fill-in-the-blank 
texts, or classification tasks. The e-Klausur is to  be taken on site, with proctoring. If an examination is 
held as an e-Klausur, then it must be ensured until t he end of the retention period that the electronic 
data can be unambiguously and unmistakably identified and associated with the examination candidate. 
The retention period for electronic data is identical to the retention periods for other forms of examination. 
(9) Examinations can be conducted in a multiple-choic e format if the examiner has personally set the 
examination. If students will be taking the exam for whom a failed examination cannot be retaken or 
otherwise remedied (cf. § 12 para. 6), then the examination should be set jointly by two persons eligible 
to set an examination. If the examination was not jointly set by two eligible examiners in this way, then 
the second examiner has a certain amount of discreti on for interpretation in their grading. In this 
situation, the second examiner is not bound to the existing grading scheme. 
(10) Oral examinations must be conducted jointly by several examiners or by one examiner in the presence 
of an observer qualified in the subject. The FPO- M can include specific regulations about the 
qualifications required of any such observer. A protocol must be created for the oral examination, to be 
signed by all examiners and/or the qualified observer. 
(11) Students from the same degree program are allowed to attend the oral exam ination as observers, 
excepting where the examination candidate objects to this. Observers of this kind are not authorized to 
attend the examiners’ consultation or the announcement of the examination results to the examination 
candidate. 
(12) In certain appropriate situations and at the discretion of the examiner, examinations can be conducted 
either orally in groups or as part of a group pr oject, presuming the individual contribution of each 
examination candidate can be clearly identified and graded. 
(13) As a rule, examinations must be conducted in the same language as the course itself. Any derogation 
of this must be announced by the respective instructors no later than four weeks after the beginning of 
the course. 
(14) Failed examinations can be repeated with certain restrictions (cf. § 12). In specially justified cases, the 
FPO-M can include derogations of this rule. S entences 1 and 2 do not apply for examinations in 
orientation modules. 
(15) Examination grades should be released no later than six weeks after the examination is completed or 
the official due date, insofar as no other deadline is stipulated by the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 12 
Repetition of Coursework and Examinations 
(1) Coursework and examinations cannot be retaken once they have been successfully passed. In 
derogation of Sentence 1, the FPO-M can include options for retaking examinations to improve grades. 
(2) Coursework and examinations, if they are graded at all, are considered passed if a grade of ‘Sufficient’ 
[ausreichend] or better is earned or, where not graded (examinations for orientation modules and 
coursework), if they are assessed as ‘Pass’ [bestanden]. If an examination comprises multiple testing 

11 
elements, then the examination is considered passed once all testing elements are completed and the 
comprehensive examination credit has been passed (cf. § 21 para. 7). 
(3) Coursework and examinations, where graded, are considered failed if a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
is awarded or, where not graded (examinations for orientation modules and cours ework), if they are  
graded as ‘Fail’ [nicht bestanden]. If an examination is comprised of multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered failed once the comprehensive examination credit is graded as failed (cf. § 21 
para. 8). In this case, all test elements of the examination must be repeated.
(4) The FPO-M can stipulate that a failed [nicht best anden] ex amination may be remedied through a 
supplementary oral examination.
(5) Examinations which have been failed or which are otherwise considered failing can typically be repeated 
up to two times. In specially justified cases, the FPO-M can include derogations  of this rule. Failed 
coursework can be repeated without limit. The FPO-M can stipulate time limits and deadlines for the 
repetition of examinations. At least two weeks must transpire between the initial announcement of 
results after the first attempt and any re-taking of the exam. This deadline can be shortened where 
requested by the student. The FPO-M can stipulate that repeat examinations be held in a different format 
from the original examination.
(6) Repeat examinations for which a failure to pass would be final and not eligible for remedy must be 
graded by at least two examiners.
(7) If an examination is graded as finally failed, or is otherwise deemed to be finally failing, then the 
chairperson of the examination board must notify the candidate of this in writing. This 
official 
correspondence must be accompanied by information detailing the appeals process against the ruling.
(8) If the failed module is a core elective, then the FPO-M must provide information on the extent to which 
the student can complete alternative modules.
§ 13
Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis 
(9) Permission to submit a master’s thesis is open to  students at the University  of Siegen who are either
enrolled in the degree program in question or who have been admitted as cross-registered students
pursuant to § 52 para. 2 HG. The FPO-M can include degree program-specific qualification
requirements.
(10) An application for permission to submit a master’s thesis must be submitted in written or electronic form
to the competent examination board, as stipulat ed in the FPO-M. The application should be
accompanied by documentation confirming that the eligibility requirements as defined in Paragraph 1
and, where applicable, in the FPO-M have been sati sfied. The FPO-M can stipulate that additional
documents must be included with the application.
(11) Notification that permission to submit a master’s thesis has been granted will be issued either as written
correspondence or via the campus management system.
§ 14
Master's Thesis 
(12) The master’s thesis is intended to demonstrate that the candidate is capable of working independently
on a problem within a predefined period and using scient ific or applied artistic methods and that they
can then present the results of that work in an appropriate form.
(13) The FPO-M governs the working time and credit points for the master’s thesis. 15–30 credit points can
be awarded for the master’s thesis. For degree programs combining different academic disciplines
[Kombinationsstudiengänge], students can select the degree component for which they wish to prepare
a master’s thesis, insofar as the relevant FPO-M do not include any derogating regulations. Topic, task,
and scope of the master’s thesis must be limited in such a manner that the candidate can complete it
within the specified period. The topic may only be changed once, and only within a certain period of time
as established in the FPO-M once the allowed working time has begun. In this case, a new topic will be
provided. Any elapsed working time will not be added onto the new allowable working time. The FPO-
M can require an oral examination or oral defense in addition to the master’s thesis, with the results

12  
counting toward the grade for the master’s thesis. 
(14) If there is a compelling reason, the deadline for subm ission of the master’s thesis can be extended up 
to one-half of the working time allowed by the stipulations of the FPO-M. In the cases of §§ 19 and 20, 
the examination board is authorized to extend the dead line for submission of the master’s thesis to as 
much as double the originally intended working time .  This time indicated in Sentence 1 is counted 
toward the working time. In general, documentati on must be provided to the competent examination 
board no later than one week before the end of the wo rking time. Illness must be documented without 
delay through a medical certificate. The option to withdraw pursuant to § 18 para. 1 remains unaffected. 
(15) The chairperson of the competent  examination board shall appoint a lead assessor and second 
assessor, as well as a third assessor where needed. 
(16) The lead, second, and third assessors must be qualifi ed to conduct examinations as regulated in § 9 
para. 1. The FPO-M can stipulate that additional prerequisites must be fulfilled to qualify for appointment 
as a lead, second, or third assessor. 
(17) As a rule, the master’s thesis must be composed in German or English. The FPO-M can stipulate that 
the master’s thesis is to be submitted in a di fferent language. The competent examination board can 
also allow further languages, by request of the candidate and with consent from the lead assessor. 
(18) The FPO-M can include supplemental master’s thesis regulations, including for the examination process 
and on its formal structure and subject matter. This includes in specific: 
1. the right on the part of the examination candidate to propose assessors for the master’s thesis, 
2. the process for assignment of the topic and the language of the master’s thesis, 
3. the formal requirements for the preparation of the master’s thesis, 
4. the securing of personal copyright for the master’s thesis, and 
5. withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allowed working time. 
 
 
§ 15 
Acceptance and Grading of the Master’s Thesis 
(1) The master’s thesis must be submitted within the prescribed time and in the format and with the number 
of copies stipulated in the FPO-M to the competent examination board or some other office of the board’s 
choosing. The submission date must be officially noted. If the thesis is to be submitted by post, then the 
time of delivery to the postal service (postmark) is considered definitive. Any thesis not submitted within 
the prescribed time will be graded as 'Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
(2) The master’s thesis shall be evaluated by a lead assessor and a second asse ssor (cf. § 14 para. 4), 
working pursuant to the stipulations of § 21. The FPO-M can regulate the organization of the examiner’s 
report and/or grade. 
(3) The examiner’s report and/or grade should be returned no later than eight weeks after receipt of the 
thesis by the chairperson of the competent examination board. If the grades are different, then the grade 
for the master’s thesis will be calculated as the arithmetic mean of the two grades (cf. § 21 para. 2). The 
grade for the master’s thesis is classified as an administrative decision in the sense of the Administrative 
Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] and is disclosed to the examination candidate, in writing 
or electronically via the campus management system, no later than ten weeks after the submission of 
the thesis. 
 
 
§ 16 
Repetition of the Master’s Thesis 
(1) A master’s thesis graded as 'Failing’ [mangelhaft] may be repeated once. 
(2) If the master’s thesis is graded as “Fail” [nicht bestanden] or “Final Fail” [endgültig nicht bestanden], or 
is otherwise deemed to be finally failed, then the ch airperson of the examination board must notify the 
candidate of this in writing. This official correspondence must be accompanied by information detailing 
the appeals process against the ruling. 
 

13  
 
§ 17 
Acceptance of Transfer Credits 
(1) Examinations and coursework from degree programs at other public or officially accredited universities, 
at public or officially accredited vocational academie s, or from degree programs at foreign public or 
officially accredited universities, are accepted upon request if the acquired skills are deemed equivalent 
to those that would have been acquired through study at the University of Siegen. 
(2) Decisions on acceptance of transfer credits pursuant to Paragraphs 1-7 will be made by the competent 
examination board. The student submitting the request is responsible for providing the information 
needed to assess the transfer credits in question. The bu rden of proof for rejecting transfer credits on 
the basis of insufficient fulfillment of the prerequisites for acceptance of such credits (within the meaning 
of Paragraph 1) falls to the competent examination board. If the case is disputed, then the facts will be 
presented to the competent representatives of t he department. Insofar as essential differences are 
identified and documented in the sense of the Lisbon  Convention, then the decision to not accept the 
transfer credits must be justified in writing. 
(3) Decisions on requests within the meaning of Paragraph 1 shall be made within a two-month deadline. 
(4) Students whose transfer credits have been accepted based on the stipulations in Paragraph 1 can and, 
where requested by the student, must be assigned a Fachsemester, calculated based on Sentences 2 
and 3. This Fachsemester reflects the number of accepted credit transfer points in relation to the overall 
number of credit points required to graduate in t he degree programs in question, multiplied by the 
standard term of study for the degree program in semesters. 
The Fachsemester is rounded up if the first decimal place is five or above, and rounded down otherwise, 
albeit never below at least one Fachsemester. 
(5) In situations where agreements and/or treaties ( Äquivalenzabkommen) exist between the Federal 
Republic of Germany and other states regarding eq uivalency in the higher education field and where 
those agreements benefit foreign students in derogati on of the terms in Paragraph 1, then the rules of 
the equivalence treaty take precedent. 
(6) By request, other knowledge and qualifications, as evidenced through appropriate documentation, can 
be credited toward the degree program where said knowledge and qualifications are equivalent in terms 
of content and level to the coursework and examinations they are to replace. 
(7) If credit is to be transferred for examination credi ts, the grades—insofar as the grading schemes in 
question are comparable—are also transferred and take n into account in the calculation of the final 
grade. If no grade is provided, or if the grading sy stems are not comparable, but sufficient evidence is 
present to allow for a grade to be inferred, then a grade will be assigned using the grading scale defined 
in § 21 para. 1 and handled as indicated in Sentenc e 1. If no such evidence is present, then—where 
applicable—the examination record will be appended with a ‘Pass’ [ bestanden]. The acceptance of 
transfer credits is noted in the Transcript of Records. 
 
 
§ 18 
Unexcused Absence, Withdrawal, Cheating 
(1) Coursework or examinations are considered 'Failing’ [ mangelhaft] or ‘Fail’ [nicht bestanden ] if the 
examination candidate is absent without compellin g reason from an examination date or other fixed 
appointment, or if the candidate withdraws with out compelling reason after the coursework or 
examination has begun. The same holds if written coursework or an examination is not submitted within 
the appointed deadline. 
(2) The following are considered ‘compelling reasons’: an illness-related inability to take the examination; 
claiming of leave based on §§ 3, 4, 6, and 8 of the German Maternity Leave Act [ Mutterschutzgesetz] 
(cf. § 19 para. 1 and 2); or, in urgent cases, care for a spouse, registered civil partner, direct relative, or 
direct in-law who has been officially declared as invalid and/or in need of care (cf. § 19 para. 3). For the 
purposes of adherence to deadlines, reasons for an unexcused absence in relation to coursework or 
examinations, and adherence to working times for the master’s thesis or coursework or examinations, 
an illness suffered by a child for whom the candidate  is the primary carer is categorized as being 
equivalent to an illness suffered by the candidate themselves. 

14  
(3) In the case of a compelling reason being asserted as grounds for a withdrawal or unexcused absence, 
that reason must be submitted in writing to the competent examination board without delay, and no later 
than three working days (based on receipt at examination board or postmark) for review of the credibility 
of the claim. In cases of an illness suffered by the candidate, a medical certificate attesting to their 
unfitness to participate in the exam ination must be submitted. T he candidate will be notified if the 
certificate is accepted. If the examination board does not accept the certificate, then the coursework or 
examination will be assigned a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
 
(4) If a submission deadline is missed for a compelling reason, then an application can be submitted to the 
competent examination board to extend the deadline by up to half of the original scheduled working 
time. In the situations described in §§ 19 and 20, the examination board is authorized to extend the 
deadline for submission of the bachelor’s thesis up to double the length of the originally scheduled 
working time. The option to withdraw pursuant to Paragraph 1 remains unaffected. 
(5) If a candidate attempts to influence the results of coursework or an examination by means of cheating, 
such as the use or carrying of unauthorized aids or  through plagiarism, they will be given a grade of 
‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] for that coursework or examination. The examiner or observer is responsible for 
investigating suspicions of cheati ng on oral coursework or examinations; for written coursework or 
examinations, this is the responsib ility of the respective examiner or proctor. All investigative findings 
will be entered into the official record. For a master’s thesis, these findings are made by the assessor. 
A decision on whether cheating occurred will be made  by the competent examination board following 
an official hearing with the concerned party. 
(6) If the examination candidate attempts to change t he results of coursework or examinations by 
influencing the testing organ or the persons empowered by that organ to conduct the examination, then 
the coursework or examination can be declared ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
(7) Candidates found to have engaged in multiple or other wise grievous attempts at cheating can also be 
expelled. 
(8) A candidate who disturbs the orderly process of t he examination can, typically after due warning, be 
disqualified by the examiner or proctor from further participation in the examination; in this case the 
coursework or examination will be graded as ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. Before such a decision is made, the 
concerned party will be granted the opportunity to provide an explanation. The hearing and reasons for 
the disqualification must be added to the official record. If the candidate is disqualified from coursework 
or an examination, then the candidate can appeal this decision to the competent examination board. 
(9) Findings of culpability must  be provided to the conc erned party by the com petent examination board 
without delay, in writing and with justifying explanation. 
 
 
§ 19 
Familial Obligations, Protective Regulations, Academic Leave 
(1) By request, a candidate can request that maternity leave periods, as established in the Maternity Leave 
Act, be accounted for in deadlines. Maternity leave provisions supersede any time frames stipulated in 
these Examination Regulations or the FPO-M; the calculation of the deadline should not include the 
period of maternity leave. 
(2) In the same way, parental leave periods under the Parental Allowance and Parental Leave Act 
(Bundeselterngeld- und Elternzeitgesetz / BEEG) as amended must be taken into consideration. The 
candidate must notify the examinati on board of the period(s) during which they wish to take parental 
leave at least four weeks prior to the date on which they wish to enter parental leave. 
(3) By request, the deadlines will be adjusted to accommodate absence periods related to care of spouses, 
registered life partners, immediate relatives, or in-laws with an officially acknowledge need for care. An 
application must be made as soon as possible after the relevant situation arises. 
(4) Proof and documentation must be included with the application(s). 
 
 
§ 20 
Hardship Compensation for Disadvantages or Chronic Illnesses 

15  
If an examination candidate can present a compelling argument, including appropriate documentation, 
that the candidate is suffering from a chronic illness or disability within the meaning of § 2 para. 1 of the 
Social Security Code [Sozialgesetzbuch] IX that prevents the candidate from applying their intellectual 
abilities for the assignment and thus they cannot complete the coursework or examination, in part or in 
whole, within the appointed deadlines, then the competent examination board can authorize an 
extension of the allotted time for the coursework or examination or of the deadlines for submission of 
coursework or examinations, or can order the submission of equivalent coursework or examinations in 
a format compatible with the candidate’s situation. 
 
 
§ 21 
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) Grades for examinations and graded coursework are awarded by the respective examiners or instructors 
and announced via the campus management system. The following classifications shall be used in 
grading: 
 
1 = Excellen t = an outstanding performance; 
2 = Good = a performance significantly better than the average; 
3 = Satisfactory = a performance that meets the average standard; 
4 = Sufficient = a performance with some deficiencies which nevertheless, on the whole, 
is sufficient; 
5 = Failing = a performance with too many deficiencies to satisfy the requirements. 
For a differentiated evaluation of result, individual grades can be lowered or raised by increments of 0.3. 
However, the grades 0.7, 4.3, 4.7 and 5.3 are not permissible. Notwithstanding Sentence 4, the FPO-M 
may stipulate that interim grades of 4.3 and 4.7 are permissible. Sentences 2 to 5 also apply in respect 
of the master’s thesis. 
(2) If the grades from two assessors are different, then the grade for the master’s thesis or examination will 
be calculated as the arithmetic mean of the two grades. If one of the two grades is ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
or the two scores are more than two full grades apart from one another, then the performance is to be 
graded by a third examiner or assessor. In this case, and where the FPO-M does not stipulate otherwise, 
the grade will be composed of the arithmetic me an of the three awarded grades. Any such grade 
formulated using the arithmetic mean must achieve at least a grade of ‘Sufficient’ [ ausreichend]. 
Otherwise, the master’s thesis or examination sha ll be considered failed. The entry for the master’s 
thesis on the academic transcript will follow the regulations of Paragraph 6. 
(3) Insofar as the grade for a comprehensive examination credit (cf. § 11 para. 2) is formed from multiple 
individual grades, then the grade shall be drawn from  the arithmetic mean of the grades from the 
individual examination elements in accordance with the weighting indicated in the module description. 
(4) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain derogating pr ovisions, the final grade for the master’s degree 
program will be formulated from the arithmetic mean of the individual grades, weighted according to the 
credit points upon which the module is based. For combination degree programs, Sentence 1 applies 
for the formulation of a subject-specific final grade for each degree component. 
(5) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain any deroga ting provision, grades formulated from multiple 
individual grades will be rounded to the first decimal place. This rounding process will only account for 
the first two digits after the decimal; all additional  decimals are struck without rounding. The number 5 
is to be rounded down. 
(6) If a grade is formulated from an arithmetic mean pursuant to Paragraph 4, then the final calculated grade 
will be graded according to the following scale: 
 
to 1.5   excellent; 
from 1.5 to 2.5 good; 
from 2.5 to 3.5 satisfactory; 

16  
from 3.5 to 4.0 sufficient; 
above 4.0   failing. 
(7) The master’s thesis, an examination, or graded coursework is considered passed if the work is graded 
as ‘Sufficient’ [ausreichend] or better. Ungraded coursework is considered passed when scored as 
‘Pass’ [bestanden] or better. If an examination comprises multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered passed once all test ing elements are completed and the comprehensive 
examination credit has been passed (cf. § 12 para. 2). 
(8) Coursework and examinations, where graded, are considered failed if a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
is awarded or, where not graded (examinations for or ientation modules and cour sework), if they are 
scored as ‘Failed’ [nicht bestanden]. If an examination comprises multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered failed once the comprehensive examination credit is graded as failed (cf. § 12 
para. 3). 
 
 
§ 22 
Completion of the Course of Studies 
(1) Studies toward the master's degree are succes sfully completed when all academic assignments 
(coursework and examinations) have been completed in accordance with the FPO-M and the internship 
regulations for the degree program and the credit point totals for the degree program as dictated in the 
FPO-M have been attained. 
(2) A candidate has finally failed their studies toward th e master's degree if an examination or master’s 
thesis needed for the master’s degree is finally failed. 
(3) If a degree candidate fails to complete their studie s toward the master's degree, the candidate can 
request a Transcript of Records for all already pa ssed academic credits, including examinations and 
any acquired ECTS credit points. 
 
 
§ 23 
Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma 
(1) A student who has succ essfully completed studies toward the master’s degree will receive an official 
degree certificate indicating their grades from the degree program, including the final grades for the 
degree program / degree components [Fachnoten], the topic and grade for the master’s thesis, and the 
final overall grade. The degree certificate indicates the date on which the last official assignment or 
examination was completed. It is also signed by the chairperson of the competent examination board. 
(2) Alongside the degree certificate, t he student will also receive a mast er’s diploma, dated the day of 
conferral. This formally documents the awarding of the university degree in accordance with § 3. 
(3) The master’s diploma is signed by the dean of the faculty to which the degree program or, in the case 
of a combination degree program, to which the major subject [ Kernfach] belongs, as well as by the 
chairperson of the competent examination board. 
(4) The master’s degree certificate and diploma are sealed wi th the official seal of the competent faculty 
pursuant to Paragraph 3. 
 
 
§ 24 
Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records 
(1) Alongside the master’s degree ce rtificate, each graduate also rece ives a Diploma Supplement and 
Transcript of Records. 
(2) In particular, the Diploma Supplement describes the essential academic material covered by the degree, 
including the sequence of courses and the competencies acquired as part of the degree. The Diploma 
Supplement also includes information about the instit ution of higher education and the German higher 
education system. 
(3) The Transcript of Records details the individual co urse sequence, the duration of study in the major 

17  
discipline and, where applicable, the selected specialist profile, all successfully completed modules, as 
well as all coursework and examinations completed ov er the course of studies (including the master’s 
thesis), including grades. In particular, it also co ntains all individual module grades. Beyond this, an 
overview based on the respective final grades is to be provided in compliance with the ECTS guidelines 
as amended. It shows which percentage of students from the respective graduating class completed the 
program within the standard term of study and the final grades they achieved. 
(4) The Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records ar e signed by the chairperson of the examination 
board and bear the seal of the faculty pursuant to § 23 para. 3. 
 
 
§ 25 
Access to Examination Records 
(1) After completion of individual examinations or the master’s thesis, the candidate is to be granted access 
to their own examinations or master's thesis, the examiners’ written reviews, as well as records of oral 
examinations. The application process for this access will be established by the competent examination 
board. § 29 of the Administrative Procedure Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the Federal State of 
North Rhine-Westphalia remains unaffected by this. 
(2) Returning written work to the students satisfies the right for access pursuant to Paragraph 1. 
 
 
§ 26 
Invalidity of Examination Results and Revocation of the Master's Degree 
(1) If, without any intention to deceive on the part of the candidate, the requirements for admission to an 
examination were not actually fulfilled, and this fact comes to light only after publication of the results of 
that examination, this error will be considered reme died by the fact of the candidate’s passing of said 
examination. If the examination candidate behaved in a premeditated way to unjustly achieve admission, 
then the competent examination board will decide on the legal consequences in consideration of the law 
on administrative proceedings [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. 
(2) If a candidate cheated during an examination, an d this cheating comes to light only after the 
announcement of the results or distribution of the certification, the examination board can retrospectively 
correct the grade for the examination in question and declare the candidate to have failed that 
examination, either wholly or in part. The incorrect certificate will be confiscated and, where necessary, 
a new one will be issued. 
(3) The master’s degree will be revoked if it is subsequ ently found that it was ac quired by cheating or if 
essential requirements for the awarding were erroneously considered to have been met. Decisions on 
revocation will be made by the competent examination board. 
(4) Prior to a decision, the concerned party will be granted the opportunity to present explanations. 
(5) The statute of limitations for dec isions pursuant to Paragraph 1 sentence 2, Paragraph 2, and 
Paragraph 3 totals five years from the date upon which the degree was conferred. The period between 
initiation and completion of an administrative proceeding to review the revocation of the academic 
degree is separate from the five-year statute of limit ations stated in Sentence 1. Beyond this, § 48 
para. 1, 3 of the Administrative Procedure Act [ Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the Federal State of 
North Rhine-Westphalia shall apply. 
 
 
Special Regulations for Teacher Education [Lehramt] 
 
 
§ 27 
Master’s Degree (Teacher Education) 
After successful completion of studies toward the master's degree in teacher education, the university 
conveys the academic degree of “Master of Education” (M.Ed.). 

18  
§ 28 
Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment (Teacher Education) 
(1) The prerequisites for admission to a master’s degree program in teacher education are regulated in the 
“Ordnung über den Zugang zu den Masterstudiengängen im Lehramt der Universität Siegen vom 15. 
Mai 2013” as amended. 
 
(2) Enrollment in teacher education degree programs  / degree components is barred to candidates who 
have irrevocably failed an examination required in the FPO-M for a degree programs or degree 
component with significant content overlap to the degree program or degree component for which 
matriculation is being sought. ‘Significant content overlap’ here refers in specific to the combination of 
identical school form with the same area of specialization or area of teaching. 
 
 
§ 29 
Structure of the Academic Program (Teacher Education) 
(1) Studies towards the master's degree in teacher education comprise several degree components (known 
as a Kombinationsstudiengang, or combination degree program). The teacher education program can 
only be undertaken as a full-time course of study. T he standard term of study for the master’s degree 
totals four semesters, including the master's t hesis. For teacher education for vocational colleges 
[Lehramt an Berufskolleg ] (Model C), the standard term of study on the dual studies model is six 
semesters, including the master’s thesis. 
(2) The bachelor’s degree in teacher education for elementary education (Grundschulen, hereinafter Gs) is 
structured as follows:  
Of the 120 credit points (CP) required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 18 CP in field of study I: Basic language education, of which at least 3 CP must be apportioned to 
specialized didactics, 
2. 18 CP in field of study II: Basic mathematical education, of which at least 3 CP must be apportioned 
to specialized didactics, 
3. 18 CP of the course of studies in field of study III and/or the teaching subject, of which at least 3 
CP must be apportioned to specialized didactics, 
4. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
5. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
6. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
7. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
15 credit points in teaching methodology per field of  study and teaching subject; at least 3 of those 
specialized didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per field of 
study or teaching subject must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(3) The master’s degree in teacher education for secondary and comprehensive schools ( Haupt-, Real-, 
Sekundar- und Gesamtschulen, hereinafter HRSGe) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 4 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 4 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 

19  
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
20 specialized didactics credit points per teaching subject; at least 4 of those specialized didactics credit 
points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 credit points in 
pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational needs. Specific 
details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(4) The master’s degree in teacher education for secondary and comprehensive schools (Gymnasien and 
Gesamtschulen, hereinafter GymGe) is structured as follows:  
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to didactics, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
15 specialized didactics credit points per teaching subject; at least 3 of those specialized didactics credit 
points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 credit points in 
pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational needs. Specific 
details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
Art or music can be selected as a sole teaching subjec t in place of two teaching subjects. In this case, 
54 CP are allocated for the course of studies in the instructional subject art or music, with at least 6 CP 
allocated to specialized didactics. 
(5) The master’s degree in teacher education for voca tional colleges (Track A: Teaching Subject and 
Vocational Specialization) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 

20  
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 15 specialized didactics 
credit points per teaching subject or vocational sp ecialization must be acquired; at least 3 of those 
specialized didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject or vocational specialization must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and 
at least 4 credit points in pedagogy on special topi cs related to inclusion of students with special 
educational needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(6) The master’s degree in teacher education for vocational colleges (Track B: Major Vocational 
Specialization and Minor Vocational Specialization) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 30 CP of the course of studies in the major vocati onal specialization, of which at least 3 CP must 
be apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 24 CP for studies in the minor vocational specialty, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
5. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s a nd master’s degrees, at least 15 specialized didactic 
credit points must be acquired in the major vocational  specialization; at least 3 of those specialized 
didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for t he bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per major 
vocational specialization must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(7) The master’s degree in teacher education for vocational colleges (Track C: Major Vocational 
Specialization and Minor Vocational Specialization as dual and non-dual master’s degree) is structured 
as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 24 CP for studies in specialized didactics for the major vocational specialty, 
2. 3 CP for studies in specialized didactics for the minor vocational specialty, 
3. 30 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 12 CP for practical elements for the bachelor’s  degree (aptitude/orientational internship, 
occupational internship), 
5. 6 CP for German for students with a migration background, 
6. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
7. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for t he bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per major 
vocational specialization must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(8) Annex 3 contains permissible combinations of teaching subjects and areas of learning. 
 
§ 30 
Examination Board (Teacher Education) 
(1) For the master’s degree programs in teacher edu cation, one central examination board for teacher 
education as well as various technical examination boards will be established. The central examination 
board for teacher education is supported in its work by the central office of examinations for teacher 

21  
education. 
(2) The central examination board comprises nine members, whenever possible from different instructional 
units involved with teacher education. The committee consists of five members who are part of the 
teaching faculty, two members of the academic staff, and two students.  Where possible, they should 
also be members of the technical examination boar ds for teacher education. One member from the 
teaching faculty group must come from the area of  pedagogy. The director of the central office of 
examinations for teacher education is a consulting member of the central examination board for teacher 
education. The term of office is 2 years, excepting for students, for whom it is one year. Re-election is 
permissible. The central examination board for teacher  education is called to session and led by its 
chairperson. 
(3) In derogation of § 8 para. 1, the members and de puty members of the central examination board for 
teacher education will be selected by the board of the Center for Teacher Education and Educational 
Sciences (ZLB) based on faculty recommendation. The central examination board for teacher education 
is responsible for all tasks delegated to the examination board in these examination regulations and the 
FPO-Ms. § 8 para. 9 remains unaffected. 
(4) The members and deputy members of the technical ex amination boards are elected by the respective 
faculty councils. At least one member must be a professor in teacher education. 
(5) In derogation of § 8 para. 9, the technical examination board is not responsible deciding on recognition 
of practical elements. This is the responsibility of the central examination board for teacher education. 
 
 
§ 31 
Examinations (Teacher Education) 
In derogation of § 11 para. 1, the modules of the ma ster's degree in teacher education each conclude 
with a final module examination that is denoted as such in the Diploma Supplement and which depicts 
the acquisition of skills from that entire module. 
 
 
§ 32 
Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis (Teacher Education) 
(1) Supplemental to § 13 para. 1, permission to submit a master’s thesis requires documentation of at least 
60 credit points from the entire course of study. 
(2) Proof should also be included along with the applicat ion for permission to submit a master's thesis 
pursuant to § 13 para. 29. 
(3) It is recommended that the master's thesis be comp leted only after the completion of the practical 
semester. 
 
 
§ 33 
Grades, Calculation of Grades (Teacher Education) 
(1) § 21 para. 1 sentence 5 does not apply for the master’s degree in teacher education. 
(2) Insofar as the FPO-M contains no derogating regulations, all module grades (once weighted based on 
the underlying credit points) are counted into the final overall grade and the subject-specific final grade 
[Fachnote]. At least three module grades per subject mu st count toward the final grade, excepting 
teacher education for elementary ed ucation, which must feature at least two module grades. Both the 
specialized didactic and pedagogic portions must be accounted for. Specific details are regulated in 
FPO-M. The division into specialized didactics and pedagogy does not apply for the program in the 
educational sciences. 
(3) Grades calculated from multiple individual grades will be rounded to the first decimal place. This 
rounding process will only account for the first two di gits after the decimal; all additional decimals are 
struck without rounding. The number 5 is to be rounded down. 
 
 
§ 34 

22  
Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma (Teacher Education) 
(1) A student who has succ essfully completed studies toward the master’s degree will receive an official 
degree certificate indicating their grades from the degree program alongside the designation “Master of 
Education” (M.Ed.) as well as reference to the specific teaching degree focus pursuant to §§ 2 to 5 of 
the Lehramtszugangsverordnung. The certificate will furthermore list the selected fields of study and the 
educational sciences together with subject grades as well as the grades for the practical semester and 
the practical examination pursuant to § 11 para. 10 of the Lehrerausbildungsgesetz, the topic and grade 
for the master’s thesis, and the overall grade. It contains information about the accreditation of the 
degree program. 
(2) In derogation of § 23 para. 2, this formal documentation of the awarding of the university degree will be 
conducted in accordance with § 27. 
(3) In derogation of § 23 para. 3, the master’s diplom a will be signed by the dea n of the faculty of the 
department which accepted the master’s thesis. The master’s diploma is also to be appended with the 
seal of the faculty from Sentence 1. The master’s diploma is also to be signed by the chairperson of the 
central examination board for teacher education. 
(4) In derogation of § 23 para. 4, the ce rtificate of degree completion is sealed with the seal of the central 
board of examiners for teacher education. 
 
 
§ 35 
Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records (Teacher Education) 
(1) Supplemental to § 24, the Transcri pt of Records must include information about inclusion-oriented 
coursework and examinations in the specializations /fields of study as well as in the educational 
sciences. 
(2) In contradiction to § 24 para. 4, the Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records are to be appended 
with the seal of the Central Office of Examinations for Teacher Education. 
 
 
Entry into Effect 
 
 
§ 36 
Entry into Effect and Publication 
(1) These Examination Regulations shall enter into effe ct on 1 October 2018. The official German version 
will be published in the “ Amtliche Mitteilungen der Universität Siegen ”, the official gazette of the 
University of Siegen. 
(2) These regulations—as restricted in § 1 para. 1— apply to degree programs and degree components for 
the master’s degree upon entry into effect of the respective FPO-Ms, in accordance with the transitional 
regulations established in the FPO-Ms. 
(3) Examination regulations for master's degree progra ms that do not satisfy the stipulations of these 
general examination regulations and whose annulment has not already been ratified or was ratified prior 
to 1 October 2020, should be adjusted no later than Winter Semester 2020/2021 to these university-
wide examination regulations. 
 
(4) The annulment of examination regulations that do not satisfy these unive rsity-wide examination 
regulations and the transitional rules are to be regul ated in the respective departmental examination 
regulations (master's) or in a separate set of regulations. 

 
(5) In derogation of Paragraph 2, these General Exami nation Regulations apply to  teacher education degree 
components toward the master’s degree starting on 1 April 2023, however only for teacher education students 
who completed a bachelor’s degree based on the general examination regulations (RPO-B) for the bachelor’s 
degree at the University of Siegen dated 1 August 2018 as amended, or who completed that degree at another 
university and who registered for the first time for a master’s degree program in teacher education [Lehramt] 
at the University of Siegen on or after 1 April 2023. 
-  
-  
 
 
It contains elements ratified by the Senate on 16 May 2018 and 11 July 2018. 
 
 
 
Siegen, 28 February 2019 Rector 
 
 
signed 
 
 
(University Professor Dr. Holger Burckhart 

Annex 1 
Sample Departmental Examination Regulations (FPO-M)  
Sample 
Departmental 
Examination 
Regulations 
(FPO-M) 
for the 
Master's Degree in… 
at the
University of Siegen 
dated 
25 
In accordance with § 2 para. 4 and § 64 para. 1 of the Higher Education Act for the State of North Rhine-
Westphalia (Hochschulgesetz, HG) dated 16 September 2014 (GV. NRW. p. 547), last amended by legislation 
dated 17 October 2017 (GV. NRW. p. 806), the University of Siegen has issued the following departmental 
examination regulations derived from the general examination regulations (RPO-M) for the Master’s Degree at 
the University of Siegen (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official Gazette] XX / XX):

Article 1 
Scope  
Article 2 
Regulations for the Single Subject Degree XX 
§ 1 Degree program model 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 
§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thes is
§
12 
Grades, Calculation of Grades
§
13 
Application and Transitional Rules
Article 3 
Regulations for the Combination Degree Program (Non-Teacher Education) XX 
§ 1 Degree Program Models 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 
§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thes is
§
12 
Grades, Calculation of Grades
§
13 
Application and Transitional Rules
Article 4 
Regulations for Teacher Education Degree Program XX 
§ 1 Degree Program Models 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 

§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thesis
§ 12 Grades, Calculation of Gra des
§ 13 Application and Transitional Rules
Article 5 
Cross-Departmental Export Modules 
Article 6 
Entry into Effect and Publication  
Annexes 
Curricula 
Annex 1 to Article 2: Curricula by degree program for single major degree programs 
Annex 2 to Article 3: Curricula by degree program for combination degree programs (non-teacher 
education) 
Annex 3 to Article 4: Curricula by degree program for teacher education core elective modules 
Annex 4 to Article 2: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Annex 5 to Article 3: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Annex 6 to Article 4: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Module Descriptions 
Annex 7 to Articles 2 - 4: Module descriptions 
Annex 8 to Article 5: Module descriptions for the modules that are only offered for export 
Derogations in the articles are possible depending on the number of degree programs, including for 
multiple single subject degree programs and/or the division of the teacher e ducation regulations by 
individual school forms (such as Article 2a, Article 2b, etc.). 

Article 1 
 Scope 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations, together with the General Examination Regulations 
for the master's degree (RPO-M) at the University of Siegen from XX (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official 
Gazette]) as amended regulate the course of study in the subject of XX.
(2) XX can be studied as a single subject degree program and/or as a degree component in a 
combination degree program and/or degree component in teacher education.
(3) Article XX contains regulations for studies in the subject of XX as a single subject degree program. 
Article XX contains regulations for
 studies in the subject of XX as combination degree program 
(non-teacher education). Article XX contains regulations for studies in the subject of XX as a degree 
component in teacher education.
Article 2 
Regulations for the Single Subject Degree XX 
§ 1
Degree program model 
XX is studied as a single major degree program. 
§ 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of degree program, the academic degree of XX1 will be awarded by the University. 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Supplemental to § 4 RPO-M, the following proof is required for admission: XX2 
(2) (Where applicable:)X The bachelor's degree must be a qualified degree in the sense of § 4 para. 2 
RPO-
M. The bachelor’s degree is a qualified degree if the bachelor’s degree is completed 
with at least
 a grade of XX.3 
(3) (Where applicable:) X Prerequisite for admission to the course of studies in XX (non-
teacher education) also includes proof of XX.4 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for admission under conditions pursuant to § 4 para. 4 RPO-M.
1 Depending on the degree program, the title of “Master of Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of 
Laws” (LL.M.) is conferred pursuant to § 3 RPO-M. 2 
2 Indication of which specialist requirements must be proven by a first-cycle professional qualification to gain access to the 
master’s degree program, such as indication of the exact bachelor’s degree pr ogram(s) or through indication of a credit points 
that must be earned in a specific field. 
3 A minimum grade for the bachelor's degree can be specified here. The specified grade cannot be random, but rather must be 
objectively justifiable. 
4 
Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

(5) (Where applicable:) X Enrollment should be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an
examination in a degree program of notably si milar content to the desired degree program and
where the examination regulations define the examination in question as essential for the desired
degree program
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(Where applicable:)X Time abroad and/or internships are (not) mandatory. 
(Where applicable:)X For internships, the Internship Regulations XX (Amtliche Mitteilung XX/20XX) 
shall apply. 
§ 6
Examinat
ion Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 RPO- M and in this Article, Faculty XX will form a
Technical Examination Board for the single subject degree program XX. (Where applicable:) X
Regulations for the Office of Examinations.
(2) The Technical Examination Board is comprised of
a) XX members of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(3) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(4) (Where applicable:)X For members pursuant to Paragraph 2, a deputy shall be elected in the event
that appointed members are unable to attend, with a term of office pursuant to Paragraph 3.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctor
s 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requir
ements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of a master's degree in the cons ecutive/conversion5 master’s degree 
program XX requires XX credit points. 
(2) The standard term of study totals XX semesters. The course of studies can be full time (where  
applicable:)X or part time.
5 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 

(3) Module Overview:
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 OM4 C/CE5 Link to module 
description6
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 OM = Orientation Module as per § 11 para. 3 RPO-M I 5 C/CE 
= Compulsory/Core Elective Module 
The recommended specialist semester (Fachsemester) is determined from the degree program curriculum 
(Anne
x XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential instructional formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 Paragraph 1 and § 11 Paragraph 6 RPO-M, the following formats are
stipulated for coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X The examinations for the modules noted as orientation modules pursuant to
§ 8 para. 3 of this article are not graded/are not calculated into the final grade.
(4) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition o
f 
Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 12 para. 5 RPO-M, examinations can be repeated in the
modules XX XX. 
6 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an 
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of imported modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12 para. 4
RPO-M. 
(5) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for examinations in the case of repeated  
examinations pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(6) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis totals XX credit points towards the master’s degree: (Where applicable:)X The
grade for the 
master’s thesis represents XX% of the final grade.
(2) Application for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically7
to the Examination Board. 
Admission to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 RPO-
M.(Where applic
able:)X Specify an y specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted working time totals XX weeks. The length of
 the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M.8
(5) The master's thesis is to be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Examination Board of
Faculty XX.
(6) (Where applicable:)X The master’s thesis will be defended in an oral examination/c
olloquium. The
grade for the 
oral examination/colloquium represents XX% of the grade for the master’s thesis.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 1 RPO-M, the awarding of provisional grades 4.3
and 4.7 is possible. 
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 2 RPO-M, the grade for the master’s thesis or the
examination is formed through assessments by three assessors or examiners.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the final grade is calculated XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X Derogations from § 21 para. 5 RPO-M.
§ 13
Application 
and Transitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
(2) The examination regulations/discipline-specific stipulations... (AM…) will become invalid on… XX.
Students who have enrolled prior to Winter Semester XX in degree program XX
7 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
8 Pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M, this includes in par ticular the following information:  supplemental regulations for 
qualifications of the assessor, right of candidate to propose a ssessors for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of th e 
topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements fo r the production of the master's  thesis, securing of individua l 
copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allotted working time.  

can still complete their studies under the stipulations of these examination regulations/discipline-
specific stipulations. 
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the General Examination Regulations XX
and these Departmental Examination Regulations. This application must be submitted to the
relevant Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
Article 3 
Regulations for the Combination Degree Program (Non-Teacher Education) XX 
§ 1
Degree Program Models 
Within the combination degree program, XX can be ta ken as a major subject (first subject) or minor 
subject 
(second subject). As a major subject, XX can be combined with the major subjects XX and 
the minor subjects XX. As a minor subject, XX can be combined with the major subjects XX.9 
§
 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of degree program, the academic degree of XX10 will be awarded by the University. 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Supplemental to § 4 RPO-M, the following proof is required for admission: XX11 
(2) (Where applicable:)X The bachelor's degree must be a qualified degree in the sense of § 4 para. 2 
RPO-
M. The bachelor’s degree is a qualified degree if the bachelor’s degree is completed 
with a grade of at least XX.12
(3) (Where applicable:) X Prerequisite for admission to the course of studies in XX (non-
teacher education) also includes proof of XX.13
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for admission under conditions pursuant to § 4 para. 4 RPO-M.
(5) (Where applicable:) X 
Enrollment should be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an 
examination in a degree program of notably similar content to the
9 If there is an overly broad number of combination possibilities such that the body text would be cumbersome to read, it is 
possible to include the combination options in an appendix and reference that appendix here. 
10 Depending on the degree program, the title of “Master of Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of Laws” (LL.M.) 
will be conferred pursuant to § 3 RPO-M. 
11 Indication of which specialist requirements must be documented through the first professional qualification to gain access to 
the master’s degree program, such as indication of the concrete bachelor’s degree program(s) or through indication of credit 
points that must be earned in a specific field. 
12 A minimum grade for the bachelor's degree can be specified here. The definition of the grade cannot be random, but rather 
must be objectively justifiable. 
13 Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

desir
ed degree program and where the examination regulations define the examination in 
question as essential for the desired degree program. 
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(Where applicable:)X Time abroad and/or internships are (not) mandatory. 
(Where applicable:)X For internships, the Internship Regulations XX (Amtliche Mitteilung XX/20XX) apply. 
§ 6
Examinat
ion Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 RPO-M and in this article, Faculty XX (alternative: the 
Faculties XX) will form a General Examination Board and General Technical Examination Board 
for the degree program (non-teacher education). (Where applicable:)X Regulations for the Office of 
Examinations.
(2) The Technical Examination Board comprises
a) XX members 
of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(3) The General Examination Board comprises
a) XX members 
of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(4) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals 
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(5) (Where applicable:)X 
For members pursuant to Paragraphs 2 and 3, a deputy shall be elected in 
the event that appointed members are unable to attend, with a term of office based on Paragraph 4.
(6) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctor
s 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requir
ements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of the degree component XX requires the earning of XX credit points in the
major subject and/or XX credit points in the minor subject.
(2) The standard term of studies for the combinat ion degree program (non-teacher education) is XX
semesters. The course of studies can be full time (where applicable:)X or part time.

(3) Module Overview:
C / CE5 
Link to module 
description 14
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 OM4 MA MI
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 OM = Orientation Module as per § 11 para. 3 RPO-M I 5 C/CE 
= Compulsory/Core Elective Module in the Major Subject/ Minor Subject 
The recommended specialist semester (Fachsemester) is determined from the degree program curricula (Annex 
XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential instructional 
formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 para. 1 and § 11 para. 6 RP O-M, the following formats are stipulated for
coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X The examinations for the modules noted as orientation modules pursuant to
§ 8 para. 3 of this article are not graded/are not calculated into the final grade.
(4) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition of Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 12 para. 5 RPO-M, examinations can be repeated in the
modules XX XX.
14 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of imported modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on the supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 4 RPO-M. 
(5) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for the examination in the case of a repeated 
examination pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(6) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis totals xx credit points towards the master’s degree: (Where applicable:)X The
grade for the 
master’s thesis represents XX% of the final grade.
(2) Application for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically15
to the Examination Board. Admission to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 RPO-M.
(Where applicable:)X Specify any specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted 
working time totals XX weeks. the length of the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para.  5, 6, 7 RPO-M.16
(5) The master's thesis is to be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Examination Board of
Faculty XX.
(6) (Where applicable:)X The master’s thesis will be defended in an oral ex
amination/colloquium. The
grade for the 
oral examination/colloquium represents XX% of the grade for the master’s thesis.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 1 RPO-M, the awarding of provisional grades 4.3
and 4.7 is possible. 
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 2 RPO-M, the grade for the master’s thesis or the
examination is formed through assessments by three assessors or examiners.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the final grade is calculated XX.
(4) (Where applicable:) X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the subject-specific final grade
[Fachnote] for the degree component is calculated XX.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Derogations of § 21 para. 5 RPO-M.
§ 13
Application and T
ransitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
15 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
16 Pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M, this includes in par ticular the following information:  supplemental regulations for 
qualifications of the assessor, right of candidate to propose a ssessors for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of th e 
topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements fo r the production of the master's  thesis, securing of individua l 
copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allotted working time. 

(2) The examination regulations/di scipline-specific stipulations ... (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official
Gazette]…) will become invalid on… XX. Students who were enrolled in degree program XX prior
to Winter Semester XX can complete their studies based on the then- applicable examination
regulations/discipline-specific stipulations.
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the general examination regulations XX
and these departmental examination regulations. This application must be submitted to the relevant
Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
Article 4 
Regulations for Degree Program in Teacher Education for XX 
§ 1
Degree Program Models 
A degree in XX as part of the Teacher Education program is possible for school forms XX. 
§ 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of the course of study, the university conveys the academic degree of 
“Master of Education” (M.Ed.). 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Admission to the master's degree program in teacher education is oriented toward § 28 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X Prerequisite for admission to the c ourse of studies in XX (teacher 
education) also includes proof of XX.17
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(1) The “Regulations for Internships” (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official Gazette] XX/20XX) applies to internships.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In the degree programs for teacher education for vocational colleges, the
“Richtlinien für die fachpraktische Tätigkeit in den Studiengängen Lehramt an Berufskollegs an
der Universität Siegen” will apply.
§ 6
Examination Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 and § 30 RPO-M and in this article, Faculty XX will
form a General Examination Board as well as a General Technical Examination Board (pursuant to
§ 30 RPO-M) for the degree component XX in the teacher education program. (Where applicable:)
X
Regulations for the Office of Examinations.
17 Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

(2) The Technical Examination Board for degree component XX in the teacher education program comprises
a) XX members of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
The chairperson of the Central Office of Examinations for Teacher Education serves as a 
consulting member of the Technical Examination Board. 
(3) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(4) For members pursuant to Paragraph 2, a deputy shall be elected in the event that appointed
members are unable to attend, with a term of office based on Paragraph 3.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctors
 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of a master’s  degree requires 18 credit points for the degree  
component of Teacher
 Education for Elementary Education (Grundschule / Gs), 27 credit 
points for
 Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschulen, 
Realschulen, Sekundarschulen
 and Gesamtschulen), and 27 credit points for Teacher 
Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (
Gymnasien and Gesamtschulen),
as well as 27 credit points for teacher education for Vocational College (Berufskolleg) in  
Model A and 30 credit points (major occupational specialization) and 24 credit points
(minor occupational specialization) in Model B and 24 credit points (major occupational  
specialization) and 3 credit points (minor occupational specialization) for
 Model C.18
(2) The standard term of study totals 4 semesters.19 The course of studies can be undertaken full time.
18 Other credit point totals apply for studies in the educational sciences. Paragraph 1 must be adjusted accordingly. 
19 In Model C, the standard term of study for a dual master’s degree program is 6 semesters. Paragraph 2 must be adjusted 
accordingly. 

(3) Module Overview:
C / CE4 
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 GS HRS 
Ge 
Gym 
Ge 
BK 
Link to 
Module 
descriptions20 A B 
Major 
B 
Minor 
C 
Major 
C 
Minor 
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 C/CE = Compulsory/Core Elective Module in teac her 
education 
for GS (Grundschule) / HRS Ge (Haupt, Real-, Sekundar- und Gesamtschule), Gym Ge (Gymnasium und 
G
esamtschule), BK ( Berufskolleg, Model A, Model B Major Occupational S pecialization, Model B Minor Occupational 
Specialization, Model C Major Occupational Specialization, Model C Minor Occupat ional Specialization) 
The recommended specialist semester [Fachsemester] is determined from the degree program curricula (Annex 
XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential 
instructional formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 para. 1 and § 11 para. 6 RP O-M, the following formats are stipulated for
coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition of Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
20 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an 
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of importe d modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on the supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 4 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for the ex amination in the case of a 
repeated examination pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(5) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis is worth 20 credit points towards the master’s degree:
(2) Application
 for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically21
to the Examination Board. Admissi
on to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 and § 32
RPO-M. (Where applicable:)X Specify any specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted working time totals XX weeks. The l
ength of the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language 
of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M.22 
(5) The master's thesis is to 
be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Central Office of
Examinations for Teacher Education.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
§ 13
Application and Transitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
(2) The examination regulations/disci pline-specific stipulations... ( Amtliche Mitteilung  [Official
Gazette]…) will become invalid on… XX. Students wh o were enrolled in degree program XX prior
to Winter Semester XX can complete their st udies based on the then-applicable examination
regulations/discipline-specific stipulations.
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the General Examination Regulations XX
and these Departmental Examination Regulations. This application must be submitted to  the
relevant Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
21 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
22 Pursuant to § 14 para. 7 RPO-M, this includes in particular t he following information: right of candidate to propose assessors  
for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of the topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements for the  
production of the master's thesis, securing of individual copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis 
prior to the start of the allotted working time. 

Article 5 
Cross-Departmental Export Modules 
The XX department offers the following cross-departmental export modules: 
No. Module 
Article 6 
Entry into Effect and Publication 
These Examination Regulations e
nter into effect upon publication. They are published in the official gazette, i.e., 
“Amtliche Mitteilungen der Universität Siegen.” 
These regulations were prepared based on the decision of the Faculty Council (the Faculty Councils) 
and the board of the Center for Teacher Education and Educational Sciences (ZLB) of XX. 
Siegen, Rector
(University Professor Dr. Holger Burckhart) 

Annex Degree Program 
Curricula23 
Annex 1 to Article 2: Curricula by degree program for single major degree programs 
- Single Subject Degree Program (full time)
- Single Subject Degree Program (part time)
Annex 2 to Article 3: Curricula by degree program for combination degree programs (non-teacher
education)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Major subject (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Major subject (part time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Expanded major (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Expanded major (part time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Minor subject (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Minor subject (part time)
Annex 3 to Article 4: Curricula by degree program for teacher education degree programs, by model
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Elementary Education (Grundschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschulen,
Realschulen, Sekundarschulen and Gesamtschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Gymnasien and
Gesamtschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model A
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model B Major Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model B Minor Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model C Major Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College C Minor Occupational Specialization
Core Elective Module 
Annex 4 to Article 2: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
No. Module CW EX CP Link to module 
description 
Annex 5 to Article 3: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 Annex 
6 to Article 4: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
23 Depending on the model of studies (full time/part time), certain annexes may not apply or additional annexes may be added 
for multiple single subject degree programs. 

Module descriptions 
Annex 7 to Articles 2 - 4: Module descriptions 
* If a module is used in different degree programs or degree components, then the status can vary between 
“Compulsory” or “Core Elective” depending on the degree program or degree component.
The binding status is determined in the module overview in § 8 and the Annex “Core Elective Modules” of the 
respective FPO.
No. Module Title Compulsory/
Core 
Elective* 
Module 
Length 
Frequency of 
Scheduling 
Workload In-Class 
Attendance 
Self-
Study 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
CP 
Language of Instruction 
Qualification Objective 
Contents 
Academic Work Format Length / Scope 
Examinations 
Coursework 
Teaching and Learning Forms (Where applicable)  Courses24 /  
Module Elements 
Group 
Size 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
Prerequisites for Participation 
Prerequisites for Awarding of CP 
Applicability in the following degree 
programs: 
Special stipulations in examination 
law regarding the module descriptions when used in 
multiple degree programs25 
Repeatability of the examination(s) (number / 
scheduling) 
Supplemental oral examination possible Yes: After each attempt: 
After last attempt: 
No: 
Test can be repeated to improve grade Yes: 
No: 
Special Stipulations 
24 Courses and/or module elements can be adopted as required. 
25 In the event of polyvalent modules, the module description can be followed by supplemental information about conditions 
of export as stipulated in examination law. This in formation above and beyond the module description was adopted to 
establish transparent conditions for exports, based on clear agreements between the participating departments and 
integrated as binding parts of the examination regulations. 

Annex 8 to Article 5: Module descriptions for the modules that are only offered for export 
* If a module is used in different degree programs or degree components, then the status can vary between 
“Compulsory” or “Core Elective” depending on the degree program or degree component.
The binding status is determined in the module overview in § 8 and the Annex “Core Elective Modules” of the 
respective FPO.
No. Module Title Compulsory/
Core 
Elective* 
Module 
Length 
Frequency 
Offered 
Workload In-Class 
Attendance 
Self-
Study 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
CP 
Language of Instruction 
Qualification Objective 
Contents 
Academic Work Format Length / Scope 
Examinations 
Coursework 
Teaching and Learning 
Forms 
(Where applicable)  Courses26 /  
Module Elements 
Group 
Size 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
Prerequisites for Participation 
Prerequisites for Awarding of CP 
Applicability in the following degree 
programs: 
Special stipulations in examination 
law regarding the module descriptions when used in one 
or multiple degree programs27 
Repeatability of the examination(s) (number / 
scheduling) 
Supplemental oral examination possible Yes: After each attempt: 
After last attempt: 
No: 
Test can be repeated to improve grade Yes: 
No: 
Special Stipulations 
26 Courses and/or module elements can be adopted as required. 
27 For export modules, the module description can be followed by supplemental information about conditions of export as 
stipulated in examination law. This information above and beyond the module description was adopted to establish 
transparent conditions for exports, based on clear agreements between the participating departments and integrated as 
binding parts of the examination regulations. 

Annex 2 
Models for Master’s Degree Programs (Non-Teacher Education) 
Two different models with one or two subjects are possible, whereby the CP distribution between the 
subjects as seen in model B is used as an example here. Electives totaling 18 CP are to be provided 
(depicted in orange shading). 
1 Subject
Degree Program/  
Interdisciplinary 
Degree Program 
A
2 Subject
Degree 
Program 
B
1st  Subject 
 incl. Master's
Thesis:
 84 CP
2nd Subject: 
18 CP
Electives totaling 18 CP 
**Or the master’s thesis is alternatively prepared in the 2nd subject.
Based on this, the CP totals are adjusted for the first and second 
subjects.
Models for the Master's Degree 
Programs (Non-Teacher Education)
(With sample CP distribution in both subjects as per Track B) 
18 CP
*Subject 
incl. Master's
Thesis
 102 CP 
18 CP

Annex 3
 
Majors Compatible with Teacher Education 
Teacher Education for Elementary Education (Grundschule / Gs) 
Field of Study I and II (mandatory) 
Field of study I: Basic language 
education 
+ 
Field of Study II: Basic 
mathematics education 
Educational sciences 
Field of Study III: 
(elective) 
English • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Art • 
Music • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • 
General Studies 
(Sachunterricht) 
• 
Sport (Deutsche 
Sporthochschule Köln) 
• 
Teacher Edu
cation for Elementary Schools with Integrated Special Needs Instruction (Gs-IFP) 
Field of Study I and II (mandatory) 
Field of study I: Basic language 
education 
+ 
Field of Study II: Basic 
mathematics education 
Pedagogy with integrated 
special needs education 
Field of Study 
III (elective) 
Music • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • 
General Studies 
(Sachunterricht) 
• 
Sport (DSHS) •

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschule, Realschule, 
Sekundarschule and Gesamtschule/HRSGe) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
History 
Mathematics 
Physics 
Practical Philosophy 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Educational sciences 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • •  • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • 
Practical Philosophy • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools with Integrated Special Needs 
Instruction (Hauptschule, Realschule, Sekundarschule and Gesamtschule/HRSGe-IFP) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
History 
Mathematics 
Physics 
Practical Philosophy 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Educational Sciences with 
IFP 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • •  • • • 
Practical Philosophy • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Gymnasien and Gesamtschulen 
[GymGe]) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
French 
History 
Mathematics 
Philosophy/Practical 
Philosophy 
Physics 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Spanish 
Educational sciences 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • • • 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
German • • • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • •  • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Philosophy/Practical 
Philosophy • • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • • • 
Spanish • • • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Education for Vocational Colleges Track A (BK A) 
In combination with 
Teaching subject BF* 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
French 
Information Technology 
Art 
Mathematics 
Music 
Physics 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Spanish 
Business Studies /Economic Policy 
Electrical Engineering 
Mechanical Engineering 
Economics 
Educational sciences 
Teaching subject BF* 
Electrical Engineering • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Mechanical Engineering • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Economics • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • •  • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Religion 
(Protestant/Catholic) 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Spanish • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Business Studies/Economic 
Policy 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
* Occupation
al specialization (berufliche Fachrichtung/BF)

Minor occupational specialization 
Automotive Engine
ering 
Production Engineering 
Taxes and 
Accounting 
Communications Engineering 
Production/Logistics/Marketing 
Technical IT 
Business IT 
Educational sciences 
Major occupational 
specialization 
Electric
al Engineering • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Mechani
cal Engineering • • 
Economics • • •
Teacher Education for Vocational 

Minor occupational specialization 
Automotive Engine
ering 
Production Engineering 
Communications 
Technical IT 
Educational sciences 
Major occupational 
specialization 
Electric
al Engineering • • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Mechani
cal Engineering 
• 
• 
Teacher Education for Vocational 

General Examination Regulations  
for the 
Master’s Degree 
[Rahmenprüfungsordnung-Master / 
RPO-M] 
at the University of Siegen 
Issued 28 February 2019 
The translations provide a service to international students, researchers and staff. The legally 
binding version of the notifications are available in German only. 

1 
In accordance with § 2 para. 4 and § 64 para. 1 of th e Highe r Education Act for the State of North Rhine-
Westphalia (Hochschulgesetz, HG) dated 16 September 2014 (Gesetz- und Verordnungsblatt, GV. NRW. 
p. 547), last amend
ed by legislation dated 17 October 2017 (GV. NRW. p. 806), the Univer sity of Siegen
has i
ssued the following general examination regulations:
Note: This unofficial version is only provided for informational purposes. Only the German-language 
regul
ations as formally published in an Amtliche Mitteilung from the University of Siegen are legally binding.

2  
General Regulations 
§ 1 Scope 
§ 2 General Objectives and Guidelines for the Master’s Degree 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment 
§ 5 Standard Term of Study and Credit Point Requirements 
§ 6 Modularization of the Academic Program 
§ 7 Structure of Studies toward the Ma ster’s Degree (Non-Teacher Education) 
§ 8 Examination Board 
§ 9 Examiners 
§ 10 Coursework 
§ 11 Examinations 
§ 12 Repetition of Coursework and Examinations 
§ 13 Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis 
§ 14 Master's Thesis 
§ 15 Acceptance and Grading of the Master’s Thesis 
§ 16 Repetition of the Master’s Thesis 
§ 17 Acceptance of Transfer Credits 
§ 18 Unexcused Absence, Withdrawal, Cheating 
§ 19 Familial Obligations, Protective Regulations, Academic Leave 
§ 20 Compensation for Disadvantages for St udents with Disabilities or Chronic Illnesses 
§ 21 Grades, Calculation of Grades 
§ 22 Completion of the Course of Studies 
§ 23 Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma 
§ 24 Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records 
§ 25 Access to Examination Records 
§ 26 Invalidity of Examination Results and Revocation of the Master's Degree  
Special Regulations for Teacher Education [Lehramt] 
§ 27 Master’s Degree (Teacher Education) 
§ 28 Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment (Teacher Education) 
§ 29 Structure of the Academic  Program (Teacher Education) 
§ 30 Examination Board (Teacher Education) 
§ 31 Examinations (Teacher Education) 
§ 32 Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis (Teacher Education) 
§ 33 Grades, Calculation of Grades (Teacher Education) 
§ 34 Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma (Teacher Education) 
§ 35 Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records (Teacher Education) 
Entry into Effect 
§ 36 Entry into Effect and Publication 

3  
Annex 1: Sample Departmental Examination Regulations (FPO-M) 
Annex 2: Sample Master’s Degree Programs (Non-Teacher Education) 
Annex 3: Majors Compatible with Teacher Education 

4  
General Regulations 
 
 
§ 1 
Scope 
(1) These General Examination Regulations [Rahmenprüfungsordnung-Master, hereinafter RPO-M] apply 
in respect of the master's degree at the University of Siegen. They govern the fundamental structure of 
studies leading to a master's degree and contain fo rmal requirements for the composition of the 
Departmental Examination Regulations [ Fachprüfungsordnung-Master, hereinafter FPO-M] and the 
Module Descriptions [ Modulbeschreibungen, MBS]. Based on these RPO-M, discipline-specific 
regulations are to be established in the FPO- M of each individual degree program and the module 
descriptions are to be created. In particular, each respective FPO-M establishes concrete regulations 
on the: 
1. goals for the university studies, 
2. academic title to be awarded, 
3. scope of studies (standard term of study, number of credit points), 
4. number of modules (module titles, module numbers), 
5. participation requirements and nominal workload for the modules, 
6. sequence of courses, 
7. content and qualification goals for the modules, 
8. instructional formats for the modules, 
9. coursework and examinations within the modules, 
10. duration and form of coursework and examinations, and the 
11. composition of the examination board. 
Insofar as a degree program includes a module from another academic discipline, cross-
reference must be provided to the corresponding module description in the FPO for that other 
discipline. If the respective rules of the two relevant FPOs are in conflict, then the relevant 
departments will need to agree on the examination modalities and record the terms of their 
agreement in the relevant module description. 
(2) For degree programs that require an internship, a se t of internship regulations should be created with 
supplemental regulations regarding internships. 
(3) For degree programs offered in cooperation with another German or foreign higher education institution, 
the FPO-M can include regulations in derogation of those stipulated in these RPO-M. 
(4) § 1 to § 26 contain general regulations. § 27 to § 35 contain special regulations (supplemental, limiting, 
or broadening) for the master’s degree in teacher education [ Lehramt]. § 36 specifies when these 
regulations enter into effect. 
 
 
§ 2 
General Objectives and Guidelines for the Master’s Degree 
(1) Consecutive master’s degree programs are designed to be consolidate or broaden existing knowledge, 
or to convey interdisciplinary or specialist expertise from a different subject area. Differentiation is made 
between “application-oriented” and “research-orient ed” profile types. Conversion master’s degree 
programs require that a candidate possesses qualified professional experience, typically of not less than 
one year. The degree program concept for conversion master's degree programs accounts for 
vocational experience and builds on this to achi eve the intended qualificati on goals. Upon successful 
completion, the master’s degree constitutes a separate university-level professional qualification. 
(2) The qualification goals are an academic or artistic level of skill befitting the desired degree and the ability 
to engage in an occupation or in personal development requiring such a qualification. 

5  
(3) Degree program-specific goals are contained in the FPO-M. 
 
§ 3 
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of the course of study, the university awards the academic degree of “Master of 
Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of Laws” (LL.M.). The FPO-M regulates which specific 
title denoted in Sentence 1 is conveyed upon successful co mpletion of the course of studies. If the studies 
comprise multiple degree components (cf. § 7 para. 1) , then the degree is conveyed in the major subject 
[Kernfach]. Conversion degree programs can also convey master’s degrees in derogation of the 
aforementioned titles. 
 
 
§ 4 
Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment 
(1) Admission to the master’s degree program is open to applicants in possession of a first cycle university 
qualification. 
(2) The FPO-M can include the following additional admission requirements within the meaning of § 49 HG:  
1. Paragraph 6 sentence 1 (Proof of specialist prerequisites), 
2. Paragraph 6 sentence 3 (Proof of a specific grade point average for the bachelor's degree), 
3. Paragraph 7 (Proof of special preparatory training related to the degree program, artistic or other 
suitability or practical activity), and 
4. Paragraph 8 (Proof of specific language skills in (partially) foreign-language degree programs). 
(3) University degrees earned in degree programs at  foreign state-run or state-accredited higher 
educational institutions will be recognized upon applic ation, insofar as the competencies acquired as 
part of the degree do not differ significantly from  a domestic degree that qualifies the applicant for 
admission to the master’s degree program. 
(4) Admission to a master’s degree program (non-teacher education) can be tied to preconditions. Any such 
conditions must be satisfied within the first two se mesters of the master’s degree program. Proof of 
fulfillment must be provided no later than at the time of registration for the master’s thesis. The FPO-M 
can stipulate that the proof of fu lfillment of the conditions be rendered at an earlier point in time. The 
nature and scope of these conditions will be determi ned on a case-by-case basis by the respective 
examination board based on the cont ent of the degree program that was previously completed. 
Preconditions may only be based on bachelor modules. Conditions can only be issued for up to 30 credit 
points. The regulations stipulated in § 8–12 and 17–21 also apply to preconditions. Examinations related 
to preconditions are not included in the calculation of the grade point average for the degree. 
(5) Supplemental to Paragraph 1 and 2, a relevant university degree conveying a professional qualification 
and relevant professional experience must be prov en for admission to a conversion master’s degree 
program. 
(6) The FPO-M can stipulate that enrollment be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an examination 
in a degree program of notably similar content to the desired degree program and where the examination 
regulations define the examination in question as essential for the des ired degree program (§ 50 
para. 1(2) HG). 
 
 
§ 5 
Standard Term of Study and Credit Point Requirements 
(1) Successful completion of studies for a master's degree requires 60, 90, or 120 credit points (CP), as 
determined by the stipulations in these regulations as well as the regulations of the relevant FPO-M. 
(2) For full time students, the standard term of study for degree programs concluding with a master’s 
degree is at least two and at most four semesters, including the master’s thesis. 

6  
The standard term of study is defined in the rele vant FPO-M. The following standard terms of study 
generally apply, depending on how many credit points need to be earned and the model of studies (full-
time or part-time): 
 
 
 
CP 
Standard term of study (in semesters) 
Full-time student Part-time student 
60 2 4 
90 3 6 
120 4 8 
 
The FPO-M define whether a given master’s degree program is available to part-time students or 
exclusively on a full-time basis. 
 
 
§ 6 
Modularization of the Academic Program 
(1) The academic program is structured modularly and works with a credit point system. Modules are self-
contained units of study that are limited in topic and time frame, and which can encompass a range of 
teaching and learning forms (such as lectures, exerci ses, internships, eLearning, individual or group 
projects, etc.). 
(2) Credit points are awarded for successful completion of a module. Credit points are calculated based on 
the projected required workload for the students. On  average, students are expected to perform 1,800 
hours of work per academic year. Each credit point is based on representing 30 hours of work, either in 
the classroom or self-guided. In  general, 60 credit points are awarde d per academic year. The credit 
points for any given module should be divisible by three. Polyvalent modules must be awarded the same 
number of credit points across the different fields of study, and usually total nine credit points. 
‘Polyvalent’ refers to modules offered across different degree programs that ar e identical in terms of 
module length, frequency offered, workload, credit points, qualification goals, content, work assignments 
(incl. form, length, scope), lectures, forms of instruction and learning, prerequisites for participation, and 
conditions for awarding of credit points. The prerequisites for successful completion of the module and 
the awarding of the credit points are defined in the FPO-M. 
(3) Admission to a course or module can be made depende nt on specific prerequi sites, and successful 
completion of another course or module(s) in particular. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 7 
Structure of Studies toward the Master’s Degree (Non-Teacher Education) 
(1) The master’s degree program (excluding teacher e ducation) comprises a degree program (single 
subject degree program/interdisciplinary degree program) or a combination degree program built around 
multiple degree components comprising a major subject [ Kernfach] and a minor subject 
[Ergänzungsfach] (Annex 2). 
(2) The FPO-M establish which models are offered for a given degree program/degree component. 
(3) Each master’s degree program should offer electives to taling at least 18 credit points. In total, the 
bachelor’s and master’s degrees should offer electives totaling 45 credit points. The FPO-M establish 
the technical and/or interdisciplinary modules from  which students of a given degree program may 
choose. Electives must be identified explicitly in the FPO-M. 
 
 

7  
§ 8 
Examination Board 
(1) Within the faculties, general and/or technica l examination boards are formed to handle the 
responsibilities defined in these RPO-M and in the FPO-M. The precise composition of those boards is 
determined within the individual FPO-M. For degree programs involving multiple faculties, the faculties 
can form interfaculty examination boards. An exam ination board can be suppor ted in the execution of 
its duties by an office of examinations. Specific details are regulated in FPO-M. 
(2) The examination boards are comprised of: 
a) members of the teaching faculty, 
b) members of the academic staff, and 
c) members of the student body, 
and at least half of the votes must be held by mem bers of the faculty. The FPO-M can allow for the 
selection of deputies in the event that appointed members are unable to attend. 
(3) An examination board may also draw upon additional members with specialized technical knowledge 
as needed. 
(4) The number and terms of office for the members of the examination board are determined in the 
respective FPO-M. The faculty council for the faculty to which the degree program belongs elects 
members of the examination board(s) specified in the FPO-M from a pool of candidates proposed by its 
respective member groups and for a term of office as specified in the FPO-M. For degree programs 
involving multiple faculties, the relevant facult y councils elect members of the examination board in 
accordance with the regulations laid out in the FPO-M. 
(5) If no new member has been elected at the end of the term of office of an incumbent member, then that 
incumbent member will continue in office. If a member resigns their duties early, then a replacement 
member shall be elected through a special election. Any member appointed through such a special 
election shall serve out remainder of the departed member’s term of office. Re-election is permissible. 
(6) The examination boards elect a chairperson and deputy chairperson from among their teaching faculty 
members. 
(7) The examination boards organize examinations in their sphere of responsibility and ensure compliance 
with the provisions of these RPO-M and the relevant FPO-M. In particular, they are responsible for ruling 
on appeals against decisions made in relation to t he exam procedures. Beyond this, the examination 
boards make decisions about the acceptance of previously acquired academic degrees and transfer of 
credit for coursework and examinations. The examin ation boards can entrust the execution of these 
duties to the chairperson, insofar as these duties are not already explicitly delegated to the chair by 
these regulations or the FPO-M; this option is not available for decisions on appeals. 
(8) The FPO-M can stipulate a reporting mandate by the examination board to the respective faculties. 
(9) Insofar as a general examination board and technica l examination board are to be formed for degree 
components, the technical examination board is responsible for the following discipline-specific tasks: 
1. Decisions on questions regarding admission and placement, 
2. Decisions on equivalency and the acceptance of academic degrees and on the transfer of 
previously completed semesters as well as coursework and examinations, 
3. Appointment of examiners pursuant to § 9 para. 2, 
4. Proposal of an assessor for the master’s thesis , insofar as the examination candidate has not 
already proposed one, in accordance with § 14 para. 7, 
5. Approval of additional languages in accordance with § 14 para. 6, and 
6. Handling of appeals to decisions made by the committee. 
The technical examination boards can delegate these duties to the chairperson, insofar as these duties 
are not already explicitly delegated to the chair by these regulations or the FPO-M; this option is not 
available for decisions on appeals. 
(10) Meetings of the examination boards are convened by the respective chairperson. Meetings of 

8  
examination boards are not open to the public. T he members of the examination boards and their 
deputies are legally obligated to confidentiality. Members who are not public sector employees [ im 
öffentlichen Dienst] must be sworn to confidentiality by the chairperson of the examination board. 
(11) The examination board has a quorum if the number of members present pursuant to Paragraph 2 (a) is 
at least equal to the number of members present from the categories indicated in Paragraph 2 (b) and 
(c) and at least half of its voting members are present. 
 
(12) The examination board decides by simple majority. In  the event of a tie, the chairperson's vote is 
decisive. 
(13) In matters related to the assessment and acceptance of academic degrees, the assessment, 
endorsement, and transfer of coursework and examination credits, and the establishment of examination 
tasks, student members of the examination board serve solely in a consulting role. 
(14) Examination boards are considered government agencies for their fields in the sense of the 
Administrative Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz]. 
 
 
§ 9 
Examiners 
(1) University examinations, in compliance with § 65 para. 1 HG, may only be held by instructors at the 
institution of higher education and,  where appropriate and necessary to  ensure the testing objectives, 
by persons with experience in the relevant field and as educators. Examinations may only be graded by 
persons who, at minimum, already hold the same or an equivalent qualification to the qualification being 
conveyed by the examination itself. Examiners are not subject to external direction in their examination 
activities. 
(2) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain any derogating regulations, the role of examiner must be 
performed by the instructors for the respective cour se or module, presuming that they satisfy the 
conditions of eligibility listed in  Paragraph 1. Alternatively, th e chairperson of the responsible 
examination board can also appoint other eligible persons (as previously defined in Paragraph 1) to 
serve as examiner. Where required for situations explicitly denoted in these examination regulations or 
the FPO-M, the chairperson of the responsibl e examination board will name a second and third 
examiner. 
(3) The FPO-M can restrict eligibility for potential examiners. 
 
 
§ 10 
Coursework 
(1) Modules can stipulate that students must complete coursework as part of courses. Coursework refers 
to all forms of learning, presentation of instruct ional materials, and other checks of knowledge and 
competency that are necessary to complete the module, but which do not factor into the official grade. 
In particular, coursework is intended to help students self-assess the success of their studies, practice 
methods of academic learning, ex plore various text and presentati on formats, independently broaden 
knowledge and competencies acquired through seminar s, and create material for additional seminar 
discussions and/or more in-depth exploration of personal interests within the module, where appropriate. 
Coursework can take on a wide range of forms, including: 
1. written test, 
2. short presentations, 
3. short written texts, 
4. oral test,  
5. samples of work or portfolios, or 
6. a combination of methods of rendering as enumerated in these regulations and the FPO-M. 
The FPO-M can also include other options for rendering coursework. Written tests in electronic form are 

9  
governed by § 11 para. 8 and 9 respectively. 
(2) The form and scope of coursework to be rendered must be denoted in the module description. Insofar 
as multiple possible methods for rendering coursework are defined, t he instructor of the course must 
announce the format and scope of coursework in an appropriate form no later than four weeks after the 
start of the course. 
(3) Insofar as the successful completion of coursework is necessary for admission to an examination, this 
must be regulated in the FPO-M. 
(4) Failed coursework can be repeated without limi t. Coursework can be graded or ungraded. Where 
graded, those grades do not count toward the respective module grade. 
(5) Students must register for coursework credit, typically using the campus management system. 
Exceptions to this rule are determined and announced by the competent examination board. 
Registration to receive credit for coursework must be made before a specified deadline. Students must 
register for coursework for each course individually. Students are responsible for informing themselves 
about all dates and deadlines for coursework (such as from the office of examinations or the campus 
management system). 
(6) Coursework grades should be released no later than six weeks after the coursework is completed or the 
official due date, insofar as no other deadline is stipulated by the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 11  
Examinations 
(1) Modules typically conclude with an examination oriented toward the qualification objectives defined for 
the module. Examinations are graded. These grades count toward the final grade. Paragraph 3 remains 
unaffected. Examination grades are classified as admi nistrative decisions within the meaning of the 
Administrative Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz]. 
(2) Examinations can be comprised of multiple ex amination elements, which together represent a 
cumulative examination credit. The individual ex amination elements, including their respective 
weighting, must be listed in the module description. 
(3) In derogation of Paragraph 1, the FPO-M can dictate that examinations related to modules intended for 
the first two semesters of a degree program’s curriculum (orientation modules) are not graded, or that 
any grades associated with such modules do not count toward the final grade. Orientation modules must 
be denoted as such in the FPO-M. 
(4) Students need to register for examinations, typica lly via the campus management system. Exceptions 
to this rule are established and announced by the competent examination board. Students need to 
register to take an examination before the specif ied deadline. Separate registration must be made for 
each individual examination. Students are responsible for informing themselves about all appointments 
and deadlines for examinations (such as from the of fice of examinations or the campus management 
system). Examination candidates can withdraw from the examination up to one week before the start of 
the examination using the campus management syst em or by contacting the competent examination 
board. 
For examination dates that have not been organized and announced via the campus management 
system or the examination board, but rather directly by the examiner, it  is possible to withdraw at any 
time prior to the start of the examination or the negotiated delivery date, provided that the FPO-M does 
not contain regulations specifying otherwise. 
(5) Examinations are only open to persons who are: 
1. officially enrolled at the University of Siegen in one or more degree programs pursuant to § 48 HG 
or who have been admitted as cross-registered students within the meaning of § 52 HG, and 
2. who have, where applicable, completed the prereq uisites for admission to the examination as 
stipulated in the FPO-M. 
Admission to examinations is generally handled by the examination registration function of the campus 
management system. Exceptions are announced by the competent examination board. The competent 
examination board decides on any disputed cases involving admission to examinations. Any candidate 
who does not fulfill the prerequisites set out in Sentence 1 shall not be admitted. 

10  
(6) The following forms of examination, among others, are permissible: 
1. written examination (including in electronic exam inations (cf. Paragraph 8) and multiple-choice 
written examination (cf. Paragraph 9) lasting from 45 minutes to a maximum of four hours, 
2. oral examinations lasting 15 to 60 minutes per candidate, 
3. term paper, or 
4. a combination of these examination formats as enumerated in these regulations and the FPO-M. 
The FPO-M can also include other examination format s. In this case, the scope of the examination 
should be regulated in the FPO-M. 
(7) The format and scope of the examination to be taken are defined in the module description. Insofar as 
several possible methods for completing examinations  are denoted, the instruct or of the course must 
announce the format and scope of the examination in an appropriate form no later than four weeks after 
the start of the course. 
(8) Examinations can be produced, conducted, and scored in  part or whole in electronic form (e-Klausur). 
In particular, electronic examinatio ns can in include editing of free te xt assignments, fill-in-the-blank 
texts, or classification tasks. The e-Klausur is to  be taken on site, with proctoring. If an examination is 
held as an e-Klausur, then it must be ensured until t he end of the retention period that the electronic 
data can be unambiguously and unmistakably identified and associated with the examination candidate. 
The retention period for electronic data is identical to the retention periods for other forms of examination. 
(9) Examinations can be conducted in a multiple-choic e format if the examiner has personally set the 
examination. If students will be taking the exam for whom a failed examination cannot be retaken or 
otherwise remedied (cf. § 12 para. 6), then the examination should be set jointly by two persons eligible 
to set an examination. If the examination was not jointly set by two eligible examiners in this way, then 
the second examiner has a certain amount of discreti on for interpretation in their grading. In this 
situation, the second examiner is not bound to the existing grading scheme. 
(10) Oral examinations must be conducted jointly by several examiners or by one examiner in the presence 
of an observer qualified in the subject. The FPO- M can include specific regulations about the 
qualifications required of any such observer. A protocol must be created for the oral examination, to be 
signed by all examiners and/or the qualified observer. 
(11) Students from the same degree program are allowed to attend the oral exam ination as observers, 
excepting where the examination candidate objects to this. Observers of this kind are not authorized to 
attend the examiners’ consultation or the announcement of the examination results to the examination 
candidate. 
(12) In certain appropriate situations and at the discretion of the examiner, examinations can be conducted 
either orally in groups or as part of a group pr oject, presuming the individual contribution of each 
examination candidate can be clearly identified and graded. 
(13) As a rule, examinations must be conducted in the same language as the course itself. Any derogation 
of this must be announced by the respective instructors no later than four weeks after the beginning of 
the course. 
(14) Failed examinations can be repeated with certain restrictions (cf. § 12). In specially justified cases, the 
FPO-M can include derogations of this rule. S entences 1 and 2 do not apply for examinations in 
orientation modules. 
(15) Examination grades should be released no later than six weeks after the examination is completed or 
the official due date, insofar as no other deadline is stipulated by the FPO-M. 
 
 
§ 12 
Repetition of Coursework and Examinations 
(1) Coursework and examinations cannot be retaken once they have been successfully passed. In 
derogation of Sentence 1, the FPO-M can include options for retaking examinations to improve grades. 
(2) Coursework and examinations, if they are graded at all, are considered passed if a grade of ‘Sufficient’ 
[ausreichend] or better is earned or, where not graded (examinations for orientation modules and 
coursework), if they are assessed as ‘Pass’ [bestanden]. If an examination comprises multiple testing 

11 
elements, then the examination is considered passed once all testing elements are completed and the 
comprehensive examination credit has been passed (cf. § 21 para. 7). 
(3) Coursework and examinations, where graded, are considered failed if a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
is awarded or, where not graded (examinations for orientation modules and cours ework), if they are  
graded as ‘Fail’ [nicht bestanden]. If an examination is comprised of multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered failed once the comprehensive examination credit is graded as failed (cf. § 21 
para. 8). In this case, all test elements of the examination must be repeated.
(4) The FPO-M can stipulate that a failed [nicht best anden] ex amination may be remedied through a 
supplementary oral examination.
(5) Examinations which have been failed or which are otherwise considered failing can typically be repeated 
up to two times. In specially justified cases, the FPO-M can include derogations  of this rule. Failed 
coursework can be repeated without limit. The FPO-M can stipulate time limits and deadlines for the 
repetition of examinations. At least two weeks must transpire between the initial announcement of 
results after the first attempt and any re-taking of the exam. This deadline can be shortened where 
requested by the student. The FPO-M can stipulate that repeat examinations be held in a different format 
from the original examination.
(6) Repeat examinations for which a failure to pass would be final and not eligible for remedy must be 
graded by at least two examiners.
(7) If an examination is graded as finally failed, or is otherwise deemed to be finally failing, then the 
chairperson of the examination board must notify the candidate of this in writing. This 
official 
correspondence must be accompanied by information detailing the appeals process against the ruling.
(8) If the failed module is a core elective, then the FPO-M must provide information on the extent to which 
the student can complete alternative modules.
§ 13
Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis 
(9) Permission to submit a master’s thesis is open to  students at the University  of Siegen who are either
enrolled in the degree program in question or who have been admitted as cross-registered students
pursuant to § 52 para. 2 HG. The FPO-M can include degree program-specific qualification
requirements.
(10) An application for permission to submit a master’s thesis must be submitted in written or electronic form
to the competent examination board, as stipulat ed in the FPO-M. The application should be
accompanied by documentation confirming that the eligibility requirements as defined in Paragraph 1
and, where applicable, in the FPO-M have been sati sfied. The FPO-M can stipulate that additional
documents must be included with the application.
(11) Notification that permission to submit a master’s thesis has been granted will be issued either as written
correspondence or via the campus management system.
§ 14
Master's Thesis 
(12) The master’s thesis is intended to demonstrate that the candidate is capable of working independently
on a problem within a predefined period and using scient ific or applied artistic methods and that they
can then present the results of that work in an appropriate form.
(13) The FPO-M governs the working time and credit points for the master’s thesis. 15–30 credit points can
be awarded for the master’s thesis. For degree programs combining different academic disciplines
[Kombinationsstudiengänge], students can select the degree component for which they wish to prepare
a master’s thesis, insofar as the relevant FPO-M do not include any derogating regulations. Topic, task,
and scope of the master’s thesis must be limited in such a manner that the candidate can complete it
within the specified period. The topic may only be changed once, and only within a certain period of time
as established in the FPO-M once the allowed working time has begun. In this case, a new topic will be
provided. Any elapsed working time will not be added onto the new allowable working time. The FPO-
M can require an oral examination or oral defense in addition to the master’s thesis, with the results

12  
counting toward the grade for the master’s thesis. 
(14) If there is a compelling reason, the deadline for subm ission of the master’s thesis can be extended up 
to one-half of the working time allowed by the stipulations of the FPO-M. In the cases of §§ 19 and 20, 
the examination board is authorized to extend the dead line for submission of the master’s thesis to as 
much as double the originally intended working time .  This time indicated in Sentence 1 is counted 
toward the working time. In general, documentati on must be provided to the competent examination 
board no later than one week before the end of the wo rking time. Illness must be documented without 
delay through a medical certificate. The option to withdraw pursuant to § 18 para. 1 remains unaffected. 
(15) The chairperson of the competent  examination board shall appoint a lead assessor and second 
assessor, as well as a third assessor where needed. 
(16) The lead, second, and third assessors must be qualifi ed to conduct examinations as regulated in § 9 
para. 1. The FPO-M can stipulate that additional prerequisites must be fulfilled to qualify for appointment 
as a lead, second, or third assessor. 
(17) As a rule, the master’s thesis must be composed in German or English. The FPO-M can stipulate that 
the master’s thesis is to be submitted in a di fferent language. The competent examination board can 
also allow further languages, by request of the candidate and with consent from the lead assessor. 
(18) The FPO-M can include supplemental master’s thesis regulations, including for the examination process 
and on its formal structure and subject matter. This includes in specific: 
1. the right on the part of the examination candidate to propose assessors for the master’s thesis, 
2. the process for assignment of the topic and the language of the master’s thesis, 
3. the formal requirements for the preparation of the master’s thesis, 
4. the securing of personal copyright for the master’s thesis, and 
5. withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allowed working time. 
 
 
§ 15 
Acceptance and Grading of the Master’s Thesis 
(1) The master’s thesis must be submitted within the prescribed time and in the format and with the number 
of copies stipulated in the FPO-M to the competent examination board or some other office of the board’s 
choosing. The submission date must be officially noted. If the thesis is to be submitted by post, then the 
time of delivery to the postal service (postmark) is considered definitive. Any thesis not submitted within 
the prescribed time will be graded as 'Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
(2) The master’s thesis shall be evaluated by a lead assessor and a second asse ssor (cf. § 14 para. 4), 
working pursuant to the stipulations of § 21. The FPO-M can regulate the organization of the examiner’s 
report and/or grade. 
(3) The examiner’s report and/or grade should be returned no later than eight weeks after receipt of the 
thesis by the chairperson of the competent examination board. If the grades are different, then the grade 
for the master’s thesis will be calculated as the arithmetic mean of the two grades (cf. § 21 para. 2). The 
grade for the master’s thesis is classified as an administrative decision in the sense of the Administrative 
Procedures Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] and is disclosed to the examination candidate, in writing 
or electronically via the campus management system, no later than ten weeks after the submission of 
the thesis. 
 
 
§ 16 
Repetition of the Master’s Thesis 
(1) A master’s thesis graded as 'Failing’ [mangelhaft] may be repeated once. 
(2) If the master’s thesis is graded as “Fail” [nicht bestanden] or “Final Fail” [endgültig nicht bestanden], or 
is otherwise deemed to be finally failed, then the ch airperson of the examination board must notify the 
candidate of this in writing. This official correspondence must be accompanied by information detailing 
the appeals process against the ruling. 
 

13  
 
§ 17 
Acceptance of Transfer Credits 
(1) Examinations and coursework from degree programs at other public or officially accredited universities, 
at public or officially accredited vocational academie s, or from degree programs at foreign public or 
officially accredited universities, are accepted upon request if the acquired skills are deemed equivalent 
to those that would have been acquired through study at the University of Siegen. 
(2) Decisions on acceptance of transfer credits pursuant to Paragraphs 1-7 will be made by the competent 
examination board. The student submitting the request is responsible for providing the information 
needed to assess the transfer credits in question. The bu rden of proof for rejecting transfer credits on 
the basis of insufficient fulfillment of the prerequisites for acceptance of such credits (within the meaning 
of Paragraph 1) falls to the competent examination board. If the case is disputed, then the facts will be 
presented to the competent representatives of t he department. Insofar as essential differences are 
identified and documented in the sense of the Lisbon  Convention, then the decision to not accept the 
transfer credits must be justified in writing. 
(3) Decisions on requests within the meaning of Paragraph 1 shall be made within a two-month deadline. 
(4) Students whose transfer credits have been accepted based on the stipulations in Paragraph 1 can and, 
where requested by the student, must be assigned a Fachsemester, calculated based on Sentences 2 
and 3. This Fachsemester reflects the number of accepted credit transfer points in relation to the overall 
number of credit points required to graduate in t he degree programs in question, multiplied by the 
standard term of study for the degree program in semesters. 
The Fachsemester is rounded up if the first decimal place is five or above, and rounded down otherwise, 
albeit never below at least one Fachsemester. 
(5) In situations where agreements and/or treaties ( Äquivalenzabkommen) exist between the Federal 
Republic of Germany and other states regarding eq uivalency in the higher education field and where 
those agreements benefit foreign students in derogati on of the terms in Paragraph 1, then the rules of 
the equivalence treaty take precedent. 
(6) By request, other knowledge and qualifications, as evidenced through appropriate documentation, can 
be credited toward the degree program where said knowledge and qualifications are equivalent in terms 
of content and level to the coursework and examinations they are to replace. 
(7) If credit is to be transferred for examination credi ts, the grades—insofar as the grading schemes in 
question are comparable—are also transferred and take n into account in the calculation of the final 
grade. If no grade is provided, or if the grading sy stems are not comparable, but sufficient evidence is 
present to allow for a grade to be inferred, then a grade will be assigned using the grading scale defined 
in § 21 para. 1 and handled as indicated in Sentenc e 1. If no such evidence is present, then—where 
applicable—the examination record will be appended with a ‘Pass’ [ bestanden]. The acceptance of 
transfer credits is noted in the Transcript of Records. 
 
 
§ 18 
Unexcused Absence, Withdrawal, Cheating 
(1) Coursework or examinations are considered 'Failing’ [ mangelhaft] or ‘Fail’ [nicht bestanden ] if the 
examination candidate is absent without compellin g reason from an examination date or other fixed 
appointment, or if the candidate withdraws with out compelling reason after the coursework or 
examination has begun. The same holds if written coursework or an examination is not submitted within 
the appointed deadline. 
(2) The following are considered ‘compelling reasons’: an illness-related inability to take the examination; 
claiming of leave based on §§ 3, 4, 6, and 8 of the German Maternity Leave Act [ Mutterschutzgesetz] 
(cf. § 19 para. 1 and 2); or, in urgent cases, care for a spouse, registered civil partner, direct relative, or 
direct in-law who has been officially declared as invalid and/or in need of care (cf. § 19 para. 3). For the 
purposes of adherence to deadlines, reasons for an unexcused absence in relation to coursework or 
examinations, and adherence to working times for the master’s thesis or coursework or examinations, 
an illness suffered by a child for whom the candidate  is the primary carer is categorized as being 
equivalent to an illness suffered by the candidate themselves. 

14  
(3) In the case of a compelling reason being asserted as grounds for a withdrawal or unexcused absence, 
that reason must be submitted in writing to the competent examination board without delay, and no later 
than three working days (based on receipt at examination board or postmark) for review of the credibility 
of the claim. In cases of an illness suffered by the candidate, a medical certificate attesting to their 
unfitness to participate in the exam ination must be submitted. T he candidate will be notified if the 
certificate is accepted. If the examination board does not accept the certificate, then the coursework or 
examination will be assigned a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
 
(4) If a submission deadline is missed for a compelling reason, then an application can be submitted to the 
competent examination board to extend the deadline by up to half of the original scheduled working 
time. In the situations described in §§ 19 and 20, the examination board is authorized to extend the 
deadline for submission of the bachelor’s thesis up to double the length of the originally scheduled 
working time. The option to withdraw pursuant to Paragraph 1 remains unaffected. 
(5) If a candidate attempts to influence the results of coursework or an examination by means of cheating, 
such as the use or carrying of unauthorized aids or  through plagiarism, they will be given a grade of 
‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] for that coursework or examination. The examiner or observer is responsible for 
investigating suspicions of cheati ng on oral coursework or examinations; for written coursework or 
examinations, this is the responsib ility of the respective examiner or proctor. All investigative findings 
will be entered into the official record. For a master’s thesis, these findings are made by the assessor. 
A decision on whether cheating occurred will be made  by the competent examination board following 
an official hearing with the concerned party. 
(6) If the examination candidate attempts to change t he results of coursework or examinations by 
influencing the testing organ or the persons empowered by that organ to conduct the examination, then 
the coursework or examination can be declared ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. 
(7) Candidates found to have engaged in multiple or other wise grievous attempts at cheating can also be 
expelled. 
(8) A candidate who disturbs the orderly process of t he examination can, typically after due warning, be 
disqualified by the examiner or proctor from further participation in the examination; in this case the 
coursework or examination will be graded as ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft]. Before such a decision is made, the 
concerned party will be granted the opportunity to provide an explanation. The hearing and reasons for 
the disqualification must be added to the official record. If the candidate is disqualified from coursework 
or an examination, then the candidate can appeal this decision to the competent examination board. 
(9) Findings of culpability must  be provided to the conc erned party by the com petent examination board 
without delay, in writing and with justifying explanation. 
 
 
§ 19 
Familial Obligations, Protective Regulations, Academic Leave 
(1) By request, a candidate can request that maternity leave periods, as established in the Maternity Leave 
Act, be accounted for in deadlines. Maternity leave provisions supersede any time frames stipulated in 
these Examination Regulations or the FPO-M; the calculation of the deadline should not include the 
period of maternity leave. 
(2) In the same way, parental leave periods under the Parental Allowance and Parental Leave Act 
(Bundeselterngeld- und Elternzeitgesetz / BEEG) as amended must be taken into consideration. The 
candidate must notify the examinati on board of the period(s) during which they wish to take parental 
leave at least four weeks prior to the date on which they wish to enter parental leave. 
(3) By request, the deadlines will be adjusted to accommodate absence periods related to care of spouses, 
registered life partners, immediate relatives, or in-laws with an officially acknowledge need for care. An 
application must be made as soon as possible after the relevant situation arises. 
(4) Proof and documentation must be included with the application(s). 
 
 
§ 20 
Hardship Compensation for Disadvantages or Chronic Illnesses 

15  
If an examination candidate can present a compelling argument, including appropriate documentation, 
that the candidate is suffering from a chronic illness or disability within the meaning of § 2 para. 1 of the 
Social Security Code [Sozialgesetzbuch] IX that prevents the candidate from applying their intellectual 
abilities for the assignment and thus they cannot complete the coursework or examination, in part or in 
whole, within the appointed deadlines, then the competent examination board can authorize an 
extension of the allotted time for the coursework or examination or of the deadlines for submission of 
coursework or examinations, or can order the submission of equivalent coursework or examinations in 
a format compatible with the candidate’s situation. 
 
 
§ 21 
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) Grades for examinations and graded coursework are awarded by the respective examiners or instructors 
and announced via the campus management system. The following classifications shall be used in 
grading: 
 
1 = Excellen t = an outstanding performance; 
2 = Good = a performance significantly better than the average; 
3 = Satisfactory = a performance that meets the average standard; 
4 = Sufficient = a performance with some deficiencies which nevertheless, on the whole, 
is sufficient; 
5 = Failing = a performance with too many deficiencies to satisfy the requirements. 
For a differentiated evaluation of result, individual grades can be lowered or raised by increments of 0.3. 
However, the grades 0.7, 4.3, 4.7 and 5.3 are not permissible. Notwithstanding Sentence 4, the FPO-M 
may stipulate that interim grades of 4.3 and 4.7 are permissible. Sentences 2 to 5 also apply in respect 
of the master’s thesis. 
(2) If the grades from two assessors are different, then the grade for the master’s thesis or examination will 
be calculated as the arithmetic mean of the two grades. If one of the two grades is ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
or the two scores are more than two full grades apart from one another, then the performance is to be 
graded by a third examiner or assessor. In this case, and where the FPO-M does not stipulate otherwise, 
the grade will be composed of the arithmetic me an of the three awarded grades. Any such grade 
formulated using the arithmetic mean must achieve at least a grade of ‘Sufficient’ [ ausreichend]. 
Otherwise, the master’s thesis or examination sha ll be considered failed. The entry for the master’s 
thesis on the academic transcript will follow the regulations of Paragraph 6. 
(3) Insofar as the grade for a comprehensive examination credit (cf. § 11 para. 2) is formed from multiple 
individual grades, then the grade shall be drawn from  the arithmetic mean of the grades from the 
individual examination elements in accordance with the weighting indicated in the module description. 
(4) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain derogating pr ovisions, the final grade for the master’s degree 
program will be formulated from the arithmetic mean of the individual grades, weighted according to the 
credit points upon which the module is based. For combination degree programs, Sentence 1 applies 
for the formulation of a subject-specific final grade for each degree component. 
(5) Insofar as the FPO-M does not contain any deroga ting provision, grades formulated from multiple 
individual grades will be rounded to the first decimal place. This rounding process will only account for 
the first two digits after the decimal; all additional  decimals are struck without rounding. The number 5 
is to be rounded down. 
(6) If a grade is formulated from an arithmetic mean pursuant to Paragraph 4, then the final calculated grade 
will be graded according to the following scale: 
 
to 1.5   excellent; 
from 1.5 to 2.5 good; 
from 2.5 to 3.5 satisfactory; 

16  
from 3.5 to 4.0 sufficient; 
above 4.0   failing. 
(7) The master’s thesis, an examination, or graded coursework is considered passed if the work is graded 
as ‘Sufficient’ [ausreichend] or better. Ungraded coursework is considered passed when scored as 
‘Pass’ [bestanden] or better. If an examination comprises multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered passed once all test ing elements are completed and the comprehensive 
examination credit has been passed (cf. § 12 para. 2). 
(8) Coursework and examinations, where graded, are considered failed if a grade of ‘Failing’ [mangelhaft] 
is awarded or, where not graded (examinations for or ientation modules and cour sework), if they are 
scored as ‘Failed’ [nicht bestanden]. If an examination comprises multiple testing elements, then the 
examination is considered failed once the comprehensive examination credit is graded as failed (cf. § 12 
para. 3). 
 
 
§ 22 
Completion of the Course of Studies 
(1) Studies toward the master's degree are succes sfully completed when all academic assignments 
(coursework and examinations) have been completed in accordance with the FPO-M and the internship 
regulations for the degree program and the credit point totals for the degree program as dictated in the 
FPO-M have been attained. 
(2) A candidate has finally failed their studies toward th e master's degree if an examination or master’s 
thesis needed for the master’s degree is finally failed. 
(3) If a degree candidate fails to complete their studie s toward the master's degree, the candidate can 
request a Transcript of Records for all already pa ssed academic credits, including examinations and 
any acquired ECTS credit points. 
 
 
§ 23 
Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma 
(1) A student who has succ essfully completed studies toward the master’s degree will receive an official 
degree certificate indicating their grades from the degree program, including the final grades for the 
degree program / degree components [Fachnoten], the topic and grade for the master’s thesis, and the 
final overall grade. The degree certificate indicates the date on which the last official assignment or 
examination was completed. It is also signed by the chairperson of the competent examination board. 
(2) Alongside the degree certificate, t he student will also receive a mast er’s diploma, dated the day of 
conferral. This formally documents the awarding of the university degree in accordance with § 3. 
(3) The master’s diploma is signed by the dean of the faculty to which the degree program or, in the case 
of a combination degree program, to which the major subject [ Kernfach] belongs, as well as by the 
chairperson of the competent examination board. 
(4) The master’s degree certificate and diploma are sealed wi th the official seal of the competent faculty 
pursuant to Paragraph 3. 
 
 
§ 24 
Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records 
(1) Alongside the master’s degree ce rtificate, each graduate also rece ives a Diploma Supplement and 
Transcript of Records. 
(2) In particular, the Diploma Supplement describes the essential academic material covered by the degree, 
including the sequence of courses and the competencies acquired as part of the degree. The Diploma 
Supplement also includes information about the instit ution of higher education and the German higher 
education system. 
(3) The Transcript of Records details the individual co urse sequence, the duration of study in the major 

17  
discipline and, where applicable, the selected specialist profile, all successfully completed modules, as 
well as all coursework and examinations completed ov er the course of studies (including the master’s 
thesis), including grades. In particular, it also co ntains all individual module grades. Beyond this, an 
overview based on the respective final grades is to be provided in compliance with the ECTS guidelines 
as amended. It shows which percentage of students from the respective graduating class completed the 
program within the standard term of study and the final grades they achieved. 
(4) The Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records ar e signed by the chairperson of the examination 
board and bear the seal of the faculty pursuant to § 23 para. 3. 
 
 
§ 25 
Access to Examination Records 
(1) After completion of individual examinations or the master’s thesis, the candidate is to be granted access 
to their own examinations or master's thesis, the examiners’ written reviews, as well as records of oral 
examinations. The application process for this access will be established by the competent examination 
board. § 29 of the Administrative Procedure Act [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the Federal State of 
North Rhine-Westphalia remains unaffected by this. 
(2) Returning written work to the students satisfies the right for access pursuant to Paragraph 1. 
 
 
§ 26 
Invalidity of Examination Results and Revocation of the Master's Degree 
(1) If, without any intention to deceive on the part of the candidate, the requirements for admission to an 
examination were not actually fulfilled, and this fact comes to light only after publication of the results of 
that examination, this error will be considered reme died by the fact of the candidate’s passing of said 
examination. If the examination candidate behaved in a premeditated way to unjustly achieve admission, 
then the competent examination board will decide on the legal consequences in consideration of the law 
on administrative proceedings [Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. 
(2) If a candidate cheated during an examination, an d this cheating comes to light only after the 
announcement of the results or distribution of the certification, the examination board can retrospectively 
correct the grade for the examination in question and declare the candidate to have failed that 
examination, either wholly or in part. The incorrect certificate will be confiscated and, where necessary, 
a new one will be issued. 
(3) The master’s degree will be revoked if it is subsequ ently found that it was ac quired by cheating or if 
essential requirements for the awarding were erroneously considered to have been met. Decisions on 
revocation will be made by the competent examination board. 
(4) Prior to a decision, the concerned party will be granted the opportunity to present explanations. 
(5) The statute of limitations for dec isions pursuant to Paragraph 1 sentence 2, Paragraph 2, and 
Paragraph 3 totals five years from the date upon which the degree was conferred. The period between 
initiation and completion of an administrative proceeding to review the revocation of the academic 
degree is separate from the five-year statute of limit ations stated in Sentence 1. Beyond this, § 48 
para. 1, 3 of the Administrative Procedure Act [ Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz] for the Federal State of 
North Rhine-Westphalia shall apply. 
 
 
Special Regulations for Teacher Education [Lehramt] 
 
 
§ 27 
Master’s Degree (Teacher Education) 
After successful completion of studies toward the master's degree in teacher education, the university 
conveys the academic degree of “Master of Education” (M.Ed.). 

18  
§ 28 
Admission Requirements and Barriers to Enrollment (Teacher Education) 
(1) The prerequisites for admission to a master’s degree program in teacher education are regulated in the 
“Ordnung über den Zugang zu den Masterstudiengängen im Lehramt der Universität Siegen vom 15. 
Mai 2013” as amended. 
 
(2) Enrollment in teacher education degree programs  / degree components is barred to candidates who 
have irrevocably failed an examination required in the FPO-M for a degree programs or degree 
component with significant content overlap to the degree program or degree component for which 
matriculation is being sought. ‘Significant content overlap’ here refers in specific to the combination of 
identical school form with the same area of specialization or area of teaching. 
 
 
§ 29 
Structure of the Academic Program (Teacher Education) 
(1) Studies towards the master's degree in teacher education comprise several degree components (known 
as a Kombinationsstudiengang, or combination degree program). The teacher education program can 
only be undertaken as a full-time course of study. T he standard term of study for the master’s degree 
totals four semesters, including the master's t hesis. For teacher education for vocational colleges 
[Lehramt an Berufskolleg ] (Model C), the standard term of study on the dual studies model is six 
semesters, including the master’s thesis. 
(2) The bachelor’s degree in teacher education for elementary education (Grundschulen, hereinafter Gs) is 
structured as follows:  
Of the 120 credit points (CP) required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 18 CP in field of study I: Basic language education, of which at least 3 CP must be apportioned to 
specialized didactics, 
2. 18 CP in field of study II: Basic mathematical education, of which at least 3 CP must be apportioned 
to specialized didactics, 
3. 18 CP of the course of studies in field of study III and/or the teaching subject, of which at least 3 
CP must be apportioned to specialized didactics, 
4. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
5. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
6. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
7. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
15 credit points in teaching methodology per field of  study and teaching subject; at least 3 of those 
specialized didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per field of 
study or teaching subject must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(3) The master’s degree in teacher education for secondary and comprehensive schools ( Haupt-, Real-, 
Sekundar- und Gesamtschulen, hereinafter HRSGe) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 4 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 4 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 

19  
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
20 specialized didactics credit points per teaching subject; at least 4 of those specialized didactics credit 
points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 credit points in 
pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational needs. Specific 
details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(4) The master’s degree in teacher education for secondary and comprehensive schools (Gymnasien and 
Gesamtschulen, hereinafter GymGe) is structured as follows:  
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to didactics, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, candidates must acquire at least 
15 specialized didactics credit points per teaching subject; at least 3 of those specialized didactics credit 
points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 credit points in 
pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational needs. Specific 
details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
Art or music can be selected as a sole teaching subjec t in place of two teaching subjects. In this case, 
54 CP are allocated for the course of studies in the instructional subject art or music, with at least 6 CP 
allocated to specialized didactics. 
(5) The master’s degree in teacher education for voca tional colleges (Track A: Teaching Subject and 
Vocational Specialization) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 27 CP of the course of studies in the primary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 27 CP of the course of studies in the secondary fi eld of study, of which at least 3 CP must be 
apportioned to specialized didactics, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 6 CP for courses in German for students with a migration background, 
5. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
6. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 

20  
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 15 specialized didactics 
credit points per teaching subject or vocational sp ecialization must be acquired; at least 3 of those 
specialized didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per teaching 
subject or vocational specialization must be acquired in the field of inclusive teaching philosophy, and 
at least 4 credit points in pedagogy on special topi cs related to inclusion of students with special 
educational needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(6) The master’s degree in teacher education for vocational colleges (Track B: Major Vocational 
Specialization and Minor Vocational Specialization) is structured as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 30 CP of the course of studies in the major vocati onal specialization, of which at least 3 CP must 
be apportioned to specialized didactics, 
2. 24 CP for studies in the minor vocational specialty, 
3. 15 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
5. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for the bachelor’s a nd master’s degrees, at least 15 specialized didactic 
credit points must be acquired in the major vocational  specialization; at least 3 of those specialized 
didactics credit points must come during the master’s degree program. 
Over the course of studying for t he bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per major 
vocational specialization must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(7) The master’s degree in teacher education for vocational colleges (Track C: Major Vocational 
Specialization and Minor Vocational Specialization as dual and non-dual master’s degree) is structured 
as follows: 
Of the 120 CP required for the master’s degree, these are divided into: 
1. 24 CP for studies in specialized didactics for the major vocational specialty, 
2. 3 CP for studies in specialized didactics for the minor vocational specialty, 
3. 30 CP for studies in pedagogy, 
4. 12 CP for practical elements for the bachelor’s  degree (aptitude/orientational internship, 
occupational internship), 
5. 6 CP for German for students with a migration background, 
6. 25 CP for the practical semester (13 CP for practical school instruction, a total of 12 CP for related 
university coursework and the research project), 
7. 20 CP for the master’s thesis. 
Over the course of studying for t he bachelor’s and master’s degrees, at least 5 credit points per major 
vocational specialization must be acquired in the fiel d of inclusive teaching philosophy, and at least 4 
credit points in pedagogy on special topics related to the inclusion of students with special educational 
needs. Specific details are regulated in the FPO-M. 
(8) Annex 3 contains permissible combinations of teaching subjects and areas of learning. 
 
§ 30 
Examination Board (Teacher Education) 
(1) For the master’s degree programs in teacher edu cation, one central examination board for teacher 
education as well as various technical examination boards will be established. The central examination 
board for teacher education is supported in its work by the central office of examinations for teacher 

21  
education. 
(2) The central examination board comprises nine members, whenever possible from different instructional 
units involved with teacher education. The committee consists of five members who are part of the 
teaching faculty, two members of the academic staff, and two students.  Where possible, they should 
also be members of the technical examination boar ds for teacher education. One member from the 
teaching faculty group must come from the area of  pedagogy. The director of the central office of 
examinations for teacher education is a consulting member of the central examination board for teacher 
education. The term of office is 2 years, excepting for students, for whom it is one year. Re-election is 
permissible. The central examination board for teacher  education is called to session and led by its 
chairperson. 
(3) In derogation of § 8 para. 1, the members and de puty members of the central examination board for 
teacher education will be selected by the board of the Center for Teacher Education and Educational 
Sciences (ZLB) based on faculty recommendation. The central examination board for teacher education 
is responsible for all tasks delegated to the examination board in these examination regulations and the 
FPO-Ms. § 8 para. 9 remains unaffected. 
(4) The members and deputy members of the technical ex amination boards are elected by the respective 
faculty councils. At least one member must be a professor in teacher education. 
(5) In derogation of § 8 para. 9, the technical examination board is not responsible deciding on recognition 
of practical elements. This is the responsibility of the central examination board for teacher education. 
 
 
§ 31 
Examinations (Teacher Education) 
In derogation of § 11 para. 1, the modules of the ma ster's degree in teacher education each conclude 
with a final module examination that is denoted as such in the Diploma Supplement and which depicts 
the acquisition of skills from that entire module. 
 
 
§ 32 
Requirements and Permission to Submit a Master’s Thesis (Teacher Education) 
(1) Supplemental to § 13 para. 1, permission to submit a master’s thesis requires documentation of at least 
60 credit points from the entire course of study. 
(2) Proof should also be included along with the applicat ion for permission to submit a master's thesis 
pursuant to § 13 para. 29. 
(3) It is recommended that the master's thesis be comp leted only after the completion of the practical 
semester. 
 
 
§ 33 
Grades, Calculation of Grades (Teacher Education) 
(1) § 21 para. 1 sentence 5 does not apply for the master’s degree in teacher education. 
(2) Insofar as the FPO-M contains no derogating regulations, all module grades (once weighted based on 
the underlying credit points) are counted into the final overall grade and the subject-specific final grade 
[Fachnote]. At least three module grades per subject mu st count toward the final grade, excepting 
teacher education for elementary ed ucation, which must feature at least two module grades. Both the 
specialized didactic and pedagogic portions must be accounted for. Specific details are regulated in 
FPO-M. The division into specialized didactics and pedagogy does not apply for the program in the 
educational sciences. 
(3) Grades calculated from multiple individual grades will be rounded to the first decimal place. This 
rounding process will only account for the first two di gits after the decimal; all additional decimals are 
struck without rounding. The number 5 is to be rounded down. 
 
 
§ 34 

22  
Master’s Degree Certificate and Diploma (Teacher Education) 
(1) A student who has succ essfully completed studies toward the master’s degree will receive an official 
degree certificate indicating their grades from the degree program alongside the designation “Master of 
Education” (M.Ed.) as well as reference to the specific teaching degree focus pursuant to §§ 2 to 5 of 
the Lehramtszugangsverordnung. The certificate will furthermore list the selected fields of study and the 
educational sciences together with subject grades as well as the grades for the practical semester and 
the practical examination pursuant to § 11 para. 10 of the Lehrerausbildungsgesetz, the topic and grade 
for the master’s thesis, and the overall grade. It contains information about the accreditation of the 
degree program. 
(2) In derogation of § 23 para. 2, this formal documentation of the awarding of the university degree will be 
conducted in accordance with § 27. 
(3) In derogation of § 23 para. 3, the master’s diplom a will be signed by the dea n of the faculty of the 
department which accepted the master’s thesis. The master’s diploma is also to be appended with the 
seal of the faculty from Sentence 1. The master’s diploma is also to be signed by the chairperson of the 
central examination board for teacher education. 
(4) In derogation of § 23 para. 4, the ce rtificate of degree completion is sealed with the seal of the central 
board of examiners for teacher education. 
 
 
§ 35 
Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records (Teacher Education) 
(1) Supplemental to § 24, the Transcri pt of Records must include information about inclusion-oriented 
coursework and examinations in the specializations /fields of study as well as in the educational 
sciences. 
(2) In contradiction to § 24 para. 4, the Diploma Supplement and Transcript of Records are to be appended 
with the seal of the Central Office of Examinations for Teacher Education. 
 
 
Entry into Effect 
 
 
§ 36 
Entry into Effect and Publication 
(1) These Examination Regulations shall enter into effe ct on 1 October 2018. The official German version 
will be published in the “ Amtliche Mitteilungen der Universität Siegen ”, the official gazette of the 
University of Siegen. 
(2) These regulations—as restricted in § 1 para. 1— apply to degree programs and degree components for 
the master’s degree upon entry into effect of the respective FPO-Ms, in accordance with the transitional 
regulations established in the FPO-Ms. 
(3) Examination regulations for master's degree progra ms that do not satisfy the stipulations of these 
general examination regulations and whose annulment has not already been ratified or was ratified prior 
to 1 October 2020, should be adjusted no later than Winter Semester 2020/2021 to these university-
wide examination regulations. 
 
(4) The annulment of examination regulations that do not satisfy these unive rsity-wide examination 
regulations and the transitional rules are to be regul ated in the respective departmental examination 
regulations (master's) or in a separate set of regulations. 

 
(5) In derogation of Paragraph 2, these General Exami nation Regulations apply to  teacher education degree 
components toward the master’s degree starting on 1 April 2023, however only for teacher education students 
who completed a bachelor’s degree based on the general examination regulations (RPO-B) for the bachelor’s 
degree at the University of Siegen dated 1 August 2018 as amended, or who completed that degree at another 
university and who registered for the first time for a master’s degree program in teacher education [Lehramt] 
at the University of Siegen on or after 1 April 2023. 
-  
-  
 
 
It contains elements ratified by the Senate on 16 May 2018 and 11 July 2018. 
 
 
 
Siegen, 28 February 2019 Rector 
 
 
signed 
 
 
(University Professor Dr. Holger Burckhart 

Annex 1 
Sample Departmental Examination Regulations (FPO-M)  
Sample 
Departmental 
Examination 
Regulations 
(FPO-M) 
for the 
Master's Degree in… 
at the
University of Siegen 
dated 
25 
In accordance with § 2 para. 4 and § 64 para. 1 of the Higher Education Act for the State of North Rhine-
Westphalia (Hochschulgesetz, HG) dated 16 September 2014 (GV. NRW. p. 547), last amended by legislation 
dated 17 October 2017 (GV. NRW. p. 806), the University of Siegen has issued the following departmental 
examination regulations derived from the general examination regulations (RPO-M) for the Master’s Degree at 
the University of Siegen (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official Gazette] XX / XX):

Article 1 
Scope  
Article 2 
Regulations for the Single Subject Degree XX 
§ 1 Degree program model 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 
§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thes is
§
12 
Grades, Calculation of Grades
§
13 
Application and Transitional Rules
Article 3 
Regulations for the Combination Degree Program (Non-Teacher Education) XX 
§ 1 Degree Program Models 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 
§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thes is
§
12 
Grades, Calculation of Grades
§
13 
Application and Transitional Rules
Article 4 
Regulations for Teacher Education Degree Program XX 
§ 1 Degree Program Models 
§ 2 Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3 Master’s Degree 
§ 4 Special Admission Requirements 
§ 5 Time Abroad and Internships 

§ 6 Examination Board 
§ 7 Examiners, Proctors 
§ 8 Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
§ 9 Coursework and Examination Credits 
§ 10 Repetition of Examinations
§ 11 Master's Thesis
§ 12 Grades, Calculation of Gra des
§ 13 Application and Transitional Rules
Article 5 
Cross-Departmental Export Modules 
Article 6 
Entry into Effect and Publication  
Annexes 
Curricula 
Annex 1 to Article 2: Curricula by degree program for single major degree programs 
Annex 2 to Article 3: Curricula by degree program for combination degree programs (non-teacher 
education) 
Annex 3 to Article 4: Curricula by degree program for teacher education core elective modules 
Annex 4 to Article 2: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Annex 5 to Article 3: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Annex 6 to Article 4: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
Module Descriptions 
Annex 7 to Articles 2 - 4: Module descriptions 
Annex 8 to Article 5: Module descriptions for the modules that are only offered for export 
Derogations in the articles are possible depending on the number of degree programs, including for 
multiple single subject degree programs and/or the division of the teacher e ducation regulations by 
individual school forms (such as Article 2a, Article 2b, etc.). 

Article 1 
 Scope 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations, together with the General Examination Regulations 
for the master's degree (RPO-M) at the University of Siegen from XX (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official 
Gazette]) as amended regulate the course of study in the subject of XX.
(2) XX can be studied as a single subject degree program and/or as a degree component in a 
combination degree program and/or degree component in teacher education.
(3) Article XX contains regulations for studies in the subject of XX as a single subject degree program. 
Article XX contains regulations for
 studies in the subject of XX as combination degree program 
(non-teacher education). Article XX contains regulations for studies in the subject of XX as a degree 
component in teacher education.
Article 2 
Regulations for the Single Subject Degree XX 
§ 1
Degree program model 
XX is studied as a single major degree program. 
§ 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of degree program, the academic degree of XX1 will be awarded by the University. 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Supplemental to § 4 RPO-M, the following proof is required for admission: XX2 
(2) (Where applicable:)X The bachelor's degree must be a qualified degree in the sense of § 4 para. 2 
RPO-
M. The bachelor’s degree is a qualified degree if the bachelor’s degree is completed 
with at least
 a grade of XX.3 
(3) (Where applicable:) X Prerequisite for admission to the course of studies in XX (non-
teacher education) also includes proof of XX.4 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for admission under conditions pursuant to § 4 para. 4 RPO-M.
1 Depending on the degree program, the title of “Master of Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of 
Laws” (LL.M.) is conferred pursuant to § 3 RPO-M. 2 
2 Indication of which specialist requirements must be proven by a first-cycle professional qualification to gain access to the 
master’s degree program, such as indication of the exact bachelor’s degree pr ogram(s) or through indication of a credit points 
that must be earned in a specific field. 
3 A minimum grade for the bachelor's degree can be specified here. The specified grade cannot be random, but rather must be 
objectively justifiable. 
4 
Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

(5) (Where applicable:) X Enrollment should be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an
examination in a degree program of notably si milar content to the desired degree program and
where the examination regulations define the examination in question as essential for the desired
degree program
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(Where applicable:)X Time abroad and/or internships are (not) mandatory. 
(Where applicable:)X For internships, the Internship Regulations XX (Amtliche Mitteilung XX/20XX) 
shall apply. 
§ 6
Examinat
ion Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 RPO- M and in this Article, Faculty XX will form a
Technical Examination Board for the single subject degree program XX. (Where applicable:) X
Regulations for the Office of Examinations.
(2) The Technical Examination Board is comprised of
a) XX members of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(3) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(4) (Where applicable:)X For members pursuant to Paragraph 2, a deputy shall be elected in the event
that appointed members are unable to attend, with a term of office pursuant to Paragraph 3.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctor
s 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requir
ements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of a master's degree in the cons ecutive/conversion5 master’s degree 
program XX requires XX credit points. 
(2) The standard term of study totals XX semesters. The course of studies can be full time (where  
applicable:)X or part time.
5 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 

(3) Module Overview:
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 OM4 C/CE5 Link to module 
description6
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 OM = Orientation Module as per § 11 para. 3 RPO-M I 5 C/CE 
= Compulsory/Core Elective Module 
The recommended specialist semester (Fachsemester) is determined from the degree program curriculum 
(Anne
x XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential instructional formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 Paragraph 1 and § 11 Paragraph 6 RPO-M, the following formats are
stipulated for coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X The examinations for the modules noted as orientation modules pursuant to
§ 8 para. 3 of this article are not graded/are not calculated into the final grade.
(4) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition o
f 
Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 12 para. 5 RPO-M, examinations can be repeated in the
modules XX XX. 
6 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an 
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of imported modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12 para. 4
RPO-M. 
(5) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for examinations in the case of repeated  
examinations pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(6) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis totals XX credit points towards the master’s degree: (Where applicable:)X The
grade for the 
master’s thesis represents XX% of the final grade.
(2) Application for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically7
to the Examination Board. 
Admission to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 RPO-
M.(Where applic
able:)X Specify an y specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted working time totals XX weeks. The length of
 the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M.8
(5) The master's thesis is to be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Examination Board of
Faculty XX.
(6) (Where applicable:)X The master’s thesis will be defended in an oral examination/c
olloquium. The
grade for the 
oral examination/colloquium represents XX% of the grade for the master’s thesis.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 1 RPO-M, the awarding of provisional grades 4.3
and 4.7 is possible. 
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 2 RPO-M, the grade for the master’s thesis or the
examination is formed through assessments by three assessors or examiners.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the final grade is calculated XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X Derogations from § 21 para. 5 RPO-M.
§ 13
Application 
and Transitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
(2) The examination regulations/discipline-specific stipulations... (AM…) will become invalid on… XX.
Students who have enrolled prior to Winter Semester XX in degree program XX
7 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
8 Pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M, this includes in par ticular the following information:  supplemental regulations for 
qualifications of the assessor, right of candidate to propose a ssessors for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of th e 
topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements fo r the production of the master's  thesis, securing of individua l 
copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allotted working time.  

can still complete their studies under the stipulations of these examination regulations/discipline-
specific stipulations. 
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the General Examination Regulations XX
and these Departmental Examination Regulations. This application must be submitted to the
relevant Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
Article 3 
Regulations for the Combination Degree Program (Non-Teacher Education) XX 
§ 1
Degree Program Models 
Within the combination degree program, XX can be ta ken as a major subject (first subject) or minor 
subject 
(second subject). As a major subject, XX can be combined with the major subjects XX and 
the minor subjects XX. As a minor subject, XX can be combined with the major subjects XX.9 
§
 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of degree program, the academic degree of XX10 will be awarded by the University. 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Supplemental to § 4 RPO-M, the following proof is required for admission: XX11 
(2) (Where applicable:)X The bachelor's degree must be a qualified degree in the sense of § 4 para. 2 
RPO-
M. The bachelor’s degree is a qualified degree if the bachelor’s degree is completed 
with a grade of at least XX.12
(3) (Where applicable:) X Prerequisite for admission to the course of studies in XX (non-
teacher education) also includes proof of XX.13
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for admission under conditions pursuant to § 4 para. 4 RPO-M.
(5) (Where applicable:) X 
Enrollment should be barred to a candidate who has finally failed an 
examination in a degree program of notably similar content to the
9 If there is an overly broad number of combination possibilities such that the body text would be cumbersome to read, it is 
possible to include the combination options in an appendix and reference that appendix here. 
10 Depending on the degree program, the title of “Master of Arts” (M.A.), “Master of Science” (M.Sc.), or “Master of Laws” (LL.M.) 
will be conferred pursuant to § 3 RPO-M. 
11 Indication of which specialist requirements must be documented through the first professional qualification to gain access to 
the master’s degree program, such as indication of the concrete bachelor’s degree program(s) or through indication of credit 
points that must be earned in a specific field. 
12 A minimum grade for the bachelor's degree can be specified here. The definition of the grade cannot be random, but rather 
must be objectively justifiable. 
13 Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

desir
ed degree program and where the examination regulations define the examination in 
question as essential for the desired degree program. 
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(Where applicable:)X Time abroad and/or internships are (not) mandatory. 
(Where applicable:)X For internships, the Internship Regulations XX (Amtliche Mitteilung XX/20XX) apply. 
§ 6
Examinat
ion Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 RPO-M and in this article, Faculty XX (alternative: the 
Faculties XX) will form a General Examination Board and General Technical Examination Board 
for the degree program (non-teacher education). (Where applicable:)X Regulations for the Office of 
Examinations.
(2) The Technical Examination Board comprises
a) XX members 
of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(3) The General Examination Board comprises
a) XX members 
of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
(4) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals 
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(5) (Where applicable:)X 
For members pursuant to Paragraphs 2 and 3, a deputy shall be elected in 
the event that appointed members are unable to attend, with a term of office based on Paragraph 4.
(6) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctor
s 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requir
ements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of the degree component XX requires the earning of XX credit points in the
major subject and/or XX credit points in the minor subject.
(2) The standard term of studies for the combinat ion degree program (non-teacher education) is XX
semesters. The course of studies can be full time (where applicable:)X or part time.

(3) Module Overview:
C / CE5 
Link to module 
description 14
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 OM4 MA MI
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 OM = Orientation Module as per § 11 para. 3 RPO-M I 5 C/CE 
= Compulsory/Core Elective Module in the Major Subject/ Minor Subject 
The recommended specialist semester (Fachsemester) is determined from the degree program curricula (Annex 
XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential instructional 
formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 para. 1 and § 11 para. 6 RP O-M, the following formats are stipulated for
coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X The examinations for the modules noted as orientation modules pursuant to
§ 8 para. 3 of this article are not graded/are not calculated into the final grade.
(4) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition of Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 12 para. 5 RPO-M, examinations can be repeated in the
modules XX XX.
14 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of imported modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on the supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 4 RPO-M. 
(5) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for the examination in the case of a repeated 
examination pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(6) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis totals xx credit points towards the master’s degree: (Where applicable:)X The
grade for the 
master’s thesis represents XX% of the final grade.
(2) Application for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically15
to the Examination Board. Admission to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 RPO-M.
(Where applicable:)X Specify any specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted 
working time totals XX weeks. the length of the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para.  5, 6, 7 RPO-M.16
(5) The master's thesis is to be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Examination Board of
Faculty XX.
(6) (Where applicable:)X The master’s thesis will be defended in an oral ex
amination/colloquium. The
grade for the 
oral examination/colloquium represents XX% of the grade for the master’s thesis.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
(1) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 1 RPO-M, the awarding of provisional grades 4.3
and 4.7 is possible. 
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 2 RPO-M, the grade for the master’s thesis or the
examination is formed through assessments by three assessors or examiners.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the final grade is calculated XX.
(4) (Where applicable:) X In derogation of § 21 para. 4 RPO-M, the subject-specific final grade
[Fachnote] for the degree component is calculated XX.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Derogations of § 21 para. 5 RPO-M.
§ 13
Application and T
ransitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
15 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
16 Pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M, this includes in par ticular the following information:  supplemental regulations for 
qualifications of the assessor, right of candidate to propose a ssessors for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of th e 
topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements fo r the production of the master's  thesis, securing of individua l 
copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis prior to the start of the allotted working time. 

(2) The examination regulations/di scipline-specific stipulations ... (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official
Gazette]…) will become invalid on… XX. Students who were enrolled in degree program XX prior
to Winter Semester XX can complete their studies based on the then- applicable examination
regulations/discipline-specific stipulations.
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the general examination regulations XX
and these departmental examination regulations. This application must be submitted to the relevant
Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
Article 4 
Regulations for Degree Program in Teacher Education for XX 
§ 1
Degree Program Models 
A degree in XX as part of the Teacher Education program is possible for school forms XX. 
§ 2
Objective of the Course of Studies 
§ 3
Master’s Degree 
After successful completion of the course of study, the university conveys the academic degree of 
“Master of Education” (M.Ed.). 
§ 4
Special Admission Requirements 
(1) Admission to the master's degree program in teacher education is oriented toward § 28 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X Prerequisite for admission to the c ourse of studies in XX (teacher 
education) also includes proof of XX.17
§ 5
Time Abroad and Internships 
(1) The “Regulations for Internships” (Amtliche Mitteilung [Official Gazette] XX/20XX) applies to internships.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In the degree programs for teacher education for vocational colleges, the
“Richtlinien für die fachpraktische Tätigkeit in den Studiengängen Lehramt an Berufskollegs an
der Universität Siegen” will apply.
§ 6
Examination Board 
(1) To handle the responsibilities denoted in § 8 and § 30 RPO-M and in this article, Faculty XX will
form a General Examination Board as well as a General Technical Examination Board (pursuant to
§ 30 RPO-M) for the degree component XX in the teacher education program. (Where applicable:)
X
Regulations for the Office of Examinations.
17 Pursuant to § 49 para. 7 and para. 8 HG. 

(2) The Technical Examination Board for degree component XX in the teacher education program comprises
a) XX members of the teaching faculty,
b) XX members of the academic staff, and
c) XX members of the student body.
The chairperson of the Central Office of Examinations for Teacher Education serves as a 
consulting member of the Technical Examination Board. 
(3) The term of office for members of the teaching faculty and members from the academic staff totals
XX years. The term of office for members of the student body totals XX years.
(4) For members pursuant to Paragraph 2, a deputy shall be elected in the event that appointed
members are unable to attend, with a term of office based on Paragraph 3.
(5) (Where applicable:)X Regulations for reporting requirements pursuant to § 8 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 7
Examiners, Proctors
 
(1) Authority to conduct an examination will be oriented toward § 9 RPO-M.
(2) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of Paragraph 1, an examiner may only be appointed if XX.
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 9 para. 2 RPO-M, the following are to be appointed as examiner...
(4) (Where applicable:)X Observers for oral examinations must fulfill the following requirements XX.
§ 8
Credit Point Requirements and Structure of the Degree Program 
(1) Successful completion of a master’s  degree requires 18 credit points for the degree  
component of Teacher
 Education for Elementary Education (Grundschule / Gs), 27 credit 
points for
 Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschulen, 
Realschulen, Sekundarschulen
 and Gesamtschulen), and 27 credit points for Teacher 
Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (
Gymnasien and Gesamtschulen),
as well as 27 credit points for teacher education for Vocational College (Berufskolleg) in  
Model A and 30 credit points (major occupational specialization) and 24 credit points
(minor occupational specialization) in Model B and 24 credit points (major occupational  
specialization) and 3 credit points (minor occupational specialization) for
 Model C.18
(2) The standard term of study totals 4 semesters.19 The course of studies can be undertaken full time.
18 Other credit point totals apply for studies in the educational sciences. Paragraph 1 must be adjusted accordingly. 
19 In Model C, the standard term of study for a dual master’s degree program is 6 semesters. Paragraph 2 must be adjusted 
accordingly. 

(3) Module Overview:
C / CE4 
No. Module CW1 EX2 CP3 GS HRS 
Ge 
Gym 
Ge 
BK 
Link to 
Module 
descriptions20 A B 
Major 
B 
Minor 
C 
Major 
C 
Minor 
1 CW = Coursework I 2 EX = Examination I ³ CP = Credit Points I 4 C/CE = Compulsory/Core Elective Module in teac her 
education 
for GS (Grundschule) / HRS Ge (Haupt, Real-, Sekundar- und Gesamtschule), Gym Ge (Gymnasium und 
G
esamtschule), BK ( Berufskolleg, Model A, Model B Major Occupational S pecialization, Model B Minor Occupational 
Specialization, Model C Major Occupational Specialization, Model C Minor Occupat ional Specialization) 
The recommended specialist semester [Fachsemester] is determined from the degree program curricula (Annex 
XX). 
(4) (Where applicable:)X Supplemental information about the core elective modules.
(5) Potential 
instructional formats are: XX. The concrete instructional format must be listed in the module 
description.
§ 9
Coursework and Examination Credits 
(1) Supplemental to § 10 para. 1 and § 11 para. 6 RP O-M, the following formats are stipulated for
coursework and examination credits.
1. Coursework:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
2. Examination credits:
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
- XX (Format / Scope)
(2) (Where applicable:)X Admission to the examination for module XX is predicated on...
(3) (Where applicable:)X In derogation of § 10 para. 6 and § 11 para. 15 RPO-M, grades for coursework
and examinations are to be shared no later than XX weeks after the date of provision or submission.
§ 10
Repetition of Examinations 
(1) Appointments for repeating failed examinations will be offered XX.
(2) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on repeated examination(s) to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 1 RPO-M. 
20 Information must be provided here on the location of the module description for the module. This can be a reference to an 
appendix to this FPO-M or, in the event of importe d modules, a reference to another FPO. 

(3) (Where applicable:)X Regulations on the supplementary examination to improve grades pursuant to § 12
para. 4 RPO-M. 
(4) (Where applicable:) X Regulations on the format for the ex amination in the case of a 
repeated examination pursuant to § 12 para. 5 sentence 7 RPO-M.
(5) Regulations for failing a core elective module pursuant to § 12 para. 8 RPO-M.
§ 11
Master's Thesis 
(1) The master's thesis is worth 20 credit points towards the master’s degree:
(2) Application
 for admission to the master's thesis is to be submitted in writing/electronically21
to the Examination Board. Admissi
on to the master’s thesis will be oriented toward § 13 and § 32
RPO-M. (Where applicable:)X Specify any specific admission stipulations/documents.
(3) The allotted working time totals XX weeks. The l
ength of the master’s thesis should not exceed XX
pages. The topic for the master’s thesis can be changed only once within 
XX.
(4) (Where applicable:)X List of additional regulations for the examination process, on the preparation
and language 
of the master's thesis pursuant to § 14 para. 5, 6, 7 RPO-M.22 
(5) The master's thesis is to 
be submitted in XX copies in XX format to the Central Office of
Examinations for Teacher Education.
§ 12
Grades, Calculation of Grades 
§ 13
Application and Transitional Rules 
(1) These Departmental Examination Regulations apply for all students who have enrolled for the first
time in this master’s degree program at the University of Siegen starting with winter semester XX.
(2) The examination regulations/disci pline-specific stipulations... ( Amtliche Mitteilung  [Official
Gazette]…) will become invalid on… XX. Students wh o were enrolled in degree program XX prior
to Winter Semester XX can complete their st udies based on the then-applicable examination
regulations/discipline-specific stipulations.
(3) Students who were already enrolled in degree program XX prior to the winter semester XX have
the option of applying to have their studies regulated by the General Examination Regulations XX
and these Departmental Examination Regulations. This application must be submitted to  the
relevant Examination Board and cannot be withdrawn.
21 Please cross out whichever is not applicable. 
22 Pursuant to § 14 para. 7 RPO-M, this includes in particular t he following information: right of candidate to propose assessors  
for the master’s thesis, procedure for assignment of the topic and language of the master’s thesis, formal requirements for the  
production of the master's thesis, securing of individual copyright for the master’s thesis, and withdrawal from the master’s thesis 
prior to the start of the allotted working time. 

Article 5 
Cross-Departmental Export Modules 
The XX department offers the following cross-departmental export modules: 
No. Module 
Article 6 
Entry into Effect and Publication 
These Examination Regulations e
nter into effect upon publication. They are published in the official gazette, i.e., 
“Amtliche Mitteilungen der Universität Siegen.” 
These regulations were prepared based on the decision of the Faculty Council (the Faculty Councils) 
and the board of the Center for Teacher Education and Educational Sciences (ZLB) of XX. 
Siegen, Rector
(University Professor Dr. Holger Burckhart) 

Annex Degree Program 
Curricula23 
Annex 1 to Article 2: Curricula by degree program for single major degree programs 
- Single Subject Degree Program (full time)
- Single Subject Degree Program (part time)
Annex 2 to Article 3: Curricula by degree program for combination degree programs (non-teacher
education)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Major subject (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Major subject (part time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Expanded major (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Expanded major (part time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Minor subject (full time)
- Combination degree program (non-teacher education): Minor subject (part time)
Annex 3 to Article 4: Curricula by degree program for teacher education degree programs, by model
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Elementary Education (Grundschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschulen,
Realschulen, Sekundarschulen and Gesamtschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Gymnasien and
Gesamtschulen)
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model A
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model B Major Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model B Minor Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College Model C Major Occupational Specialization
- Degree Component Teacher Education for Vocational College C Minor Occupational Specialization
Core Elective Module 
Annex 4 to Article 2: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
No. Module CW EX CP Link to module 
description 
Annex 5 to Article 3: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 Annex 
6 to Article 4: List of core elective modules pursuant to § 8 para. 4 
23 Depending on the model of studies (full time/part time), certain annexes may not apply or additional annexes may be added 
for multiple single subject degree programs. 

Module descriptions 
Annex 7 to Articles 2 - 4: Module descriptions 
* If a module is used in different degree programs or degree components, then the status can vary between 
“Compulsory” or “Core Elective” depending on the degree program or degree component.
The binding status is determined in the module overview in § 8 and the Annex “Core Elective Modules” of the 
respective FPO.
No. Module Title Compulsory/
Core 
Elective* 
Module 
Length 
Frequency of 
Scheduling 
Workload In-Class 
Attendance 
Self-
Study 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
CP 
Language of Instruction 
Qualification Objective 
Contents 
Academic Work Format Length / Scope 
Examinations 
Coursework 
Teaching and Learning Forms (Where applicable)  Courses24 /  
Module Elements 
Group 
Size 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
Prerequisites for Participation 
Prerequisites for Awarding of CP 
Applicability in the following degree 
programs: 
Special stipulations in examination 
law regarding the module descriptions when used in 
multiple degree programs25 
Repeatability of the examination(s) (number / 
scheduling) 
Supplemental oral examination possible Yes: After each attempt: 
After last attempt: 
No: 
Test can be repeated to improve grade Yes: 
No: 
Special Stipulations 
24 Courses and/or module elements can be adopted as required. 
25 In the event of polyvalent modules, the module description can be followed by supplemental information about conditions 
of export as stipulated in examination law. This in formation above and beyond the module description was adopted to 
establish transparent conditions for exports, based on clear agreements between the participating departments and 
integrated as binding parts of the examination regulations. 

Annex 8 to Article 5: Module descriptions for the modules that are only offered for export 
* If a module is used in different degree programs or degree components, then the status can vary between 
“Compulsory” or “Core Elective” depending on the degree program or degree component.
The binding status is determined in the module overview in § 8 and the Annex “Core Elective Modules” of the 
respective FPO.
No. Module Title Compulsory/
Core 
Elective* 
Module 
Length 
Frequency 
Offered 
Workload In-Class 
Attendance 
Self-
Study 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
CP 
Language of Instruction 
Qualification Objective 
Contents 
Academic Work Format Length / Scope 
Examinations 
Coursework 
Teaching and Learning 
Forms 
(Where applicable)  Courses26 /  
Module Elements 
Group 
Size 
Hours Per 
Week per 
Semester 
Prerequisites for Participation 
Prerequisites for Awarding of CP 
Applicability in the following degree 
programs: 
Special stipulations in examination 
law regarding the module descriptions when used in one 
or multiple degree programs27 
Repeatability of the examination(s) (number / 
scheduling) 
Supplemental oral examination possible Yes: After each attempt: 
After last attempt: 
No: 
Test can be repeated to improve grade Yes: 
No: 
Special Stipulations 
26 Courses and/or module elements can be adopted as required. 
27 For export modules, the module description can be followed by supplemental information about conditions of export as 
stipulated in examination law. This information above and beyond the module description was adopted to establish 
transparent conditions for exports, based on clear agreements between the participating departments and integrated as 
binding parts of the examination regulations. 

Annex 2 
Models for Master’s Degree Programs (Non-Teacher Education) 
Two different models with one or two subjects are possible, whereby the CP distribution between the 
subjects as seen in model B is used as an example here. Electives totaling 18 CP are to be provided 
(depicted in orange shading). 
1 Subject
Degree Program/  
Interdisciplinary 
Degree Program 
A
2 Subject
Degree 
Program 
B
1st  Subject 
 incl. Master's
Thesis:
 84 CP
2nd Subject: 
18 CP
Electives totaling 18 CP 
**Or the master’s thesis is alternatively prepared in the 2nd subject.
Based on this, the CP totals are adjusted for the first and second 
subjects.
Models for the Master's Degree 
Programs (Non-Teacher Education)
(With sample CP distribution in both subjects as per Track B) 
18 CP
*Subject 
incl. Master's
Thesis
 102 CP 
18 CP

Annex 3
 
Majors Compatible with Teacher Education 
Teacher Education for Elementary Education (Grundschule / Gs) 
Field of Study I and II (mandatory) 
Field of study I: Basic language 
education 
+ 
Field of Study II: Basic 
mathematics education 
Educational sciences 
Field of Study III: 
(elective) 
English • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Art • 
Music • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • 
General Studies 
(Sachunterricht) 
• 
Sport (Deutsche 
Sporthochschule Köln) 
• 
Teacher Edu
cation for Elementary Schools with Integrated Special Needs Instruction (Gs-IFP) 
Field of Study I and II (mandatory) 
Field of study I: Basic language 
education 
+ 
Field of Study II: Basic 
mathematics education 
Pedagogy with integrated 
special needs education 
Field of Study 
III (elective) 
Music • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • 
General Studies 
(Sachunterricht) 
• 
Sport (DSHS) •

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Hauptschule, Realschule, 
Sekundarschule and Gesamtschule/HRSGe) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
History 
Mathematics 
Physics 
Practical Philosophy 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Educational sciences 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • •  • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • 
Practical Philosophy • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools with Integrated Special Needs 
Instruction (Hauptschule, Realschule, Sekundarschule and Gesamtschule/HRSGe-IFP) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
History 
Mathematics 
Physics 
Practical Philosophy 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Educational Sciences with 
IFP 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • •  • • • 
Practical Philosophy • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Edu
cation for Secondary and Comprehensive Schools (Gymnasien and Gesamtschulen 
[GymGe]) 
Subject 1 (mandatory) 
Biology 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
French 
History 
Mathematics 
Philosophy/Practical 
Philosophy 
Physics 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Social Sciences 
Spanish 
Educational sciences 
Subject 2 
Biology • • • • • • • • • • • 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
German • • • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • • 
History • • • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • •  • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Philosophy/Practical 
Philosophy • • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • • • 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) • • • • • • • • • • • 
Social Sciences • • • • • • • • • • • 
Spanish • • • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • • • 

Teacher Education for Vocational Colleges Track A (BK A) 
In combination with 
Teaching subject BF* 
Chemistry 
German 
English 
French 
Information Technology 
Art 
Mathematics 
Music 
Physics 
Religion (Protestant/Catholic) 
Spanish 
Business Studies /Economic Policy 
Electrical Engineering 
Mechanical Engineering 
Economics 
Educational sciences 
Teaching subject BF* 
Electrical Engineering • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Mechanical Engineering • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Economics • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Chemistry • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
German • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
English • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
French • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Information Technology • • • •  • • • • • • • • • • 
Art • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Mathematics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Music • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Physics • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Religion 
(Protestant/Catholic) 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Spanish • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Business Studies/Economic 
Policy 
• • • • • • • • • • • • • 
Sport (DSHS) • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
* Occupation
al specialization (berufliche Fachrichtung/BF)

Minor occupational specialization 
Automotive Engine
ering 
Production Engineering 
Taxes and 
Accounting 
Communications Engineering 
Production/Logistics/Marketing 
Technical IT 
Business IT 
Educational sciences 
Major occupational 
specialization 
Electric
al Engineering • • 
Mandatory for all combinations 
Mechani
cal Engineering • • 
Economics • • •
Teacher Education for Vocational 

Minor occupational specialization 
Automotive Engine
ering 
Production Engineering 
Communications 
Technical IT 
Educational sciences 
Major occupational 
specialization 
Electric
al Engineering • • 
Mandatory for all 
combinations 
Mechani
cal Engineering 
• 
• 
Teacher Education for Vocational 

